

Chapter 5

MEASURABILITY AND $\sigma$-SIMPLICITY

We need further information on the structure of integrable functions if our theory of integration is to be conveniently usable. For example, if $J$ on $M$ is the Daniell extension of the pre-integral induced by a length function, must every continuous function with compact support belong to $M$? The answer is not self-evident, although it had certainly better be "yes"! We shall presently find criteria for integrability involving a set theoretic (measurability) requirement, and a magnitude requirement.

Measurable functions play the role in the theory of measure and integration that is played by continuous functions in general topology. We try to emphasize the similarities. After a couple of preliminary results we define a borel spaceÔÇöthe analogue of a topological spaceÔÇöand establish a few general propositions about measurable maps. These are then applied to the class of measurable real valued functions.

A $\sigma$-ring is a ring $\mathcal{A}$ of sets that is closed under countable union; i.e., if $\{A_n\}_n$ is a sequence in $\mathcal{A}$ then $\bigcup_n A_n \in \mathcal{A}$. Each $\sigma$-ring $\mathcal{A}$ is a $\delta$-ring, in view of the identity: if $X = \bigcup_n A_n$, then $\bigcap_n A_n = X \setminus \bigcap_n A_n = X \setminus \bigcup_n (X \setminus A_n)$. On the other hand, the family of finite subsets of any infinite set and the family of bounded subsets of $\mathbb{R}$ are $\delta$-rings that are not $\sigma$-rings.

Recall that a field of sets for $X$ is a ring $\mathcal{A}$ such that $X = \bigcup_{A \in \mathcal{A}} A$ and $X \in \mathcal{A}$. A $\sigma$-field, or $\sigma$-algebra, or borel field, is a field that is closed under countable union or, equivalently, closed under countable intersection. The family of all subsets $A$ of $\mathbb{R}$ such that $A$ or $\mathbb{R} \setminus A$ is countable is

tains $A$. The $\sigma$-field generated by $A$ is, similarly, the smallest $\sigma$-field containing $A$.

Here are some useful elementary facts about generated families. We agree that for each family $A$, the family $A_{\sigma} = \{E : E = \bigcup_{n} A_n \text{ for some } \{A_n\}_n \text{ in } A\}$.

1 PROPOSITION Suppose $A$ is a non-empty family of subsets of $X$ and that $D, S$ and $F$ are respectively the $\delta$-ring, the $\sigma$-ring and the $\sigma$-field for $X$ generated by $A$. Then

(i) each member of $D$ (of $S$) can be covered by finitely (countably, respectively) many members of $A$

(ii) each member of $D$ (of $S$) belongs to the $\delta$-ring ($\sigma$-ring, respectively) generated by a countable subfamily of $A$, and

(iii) $S = D_{\sigma}$, $D_{\sigma}$ is identical with the family of all unions of countable disjoint subfamilies of $D$, and $F \in F$ if either $F$ or $X \setminus F$ belongs to $S$.

PROOF We prove only three of the assertions, leaving other similar proofs to the reader.

Let $B = \{B : \text{there is a sequence } \{A_n\}_n \text{ in } A \text{ with } B \subset \bigcup_{n} A_n\}$. One verifies without difficulty that $B$ is a $\sigma$-ring and evidently $A \subset B$. Hence $B$ contains the smallest $\sigma$-ring $S$ that contains $A$, so if $S \in S$ then $S \in B$. Thus each member of $S$ can be covered by countably many members of $A$.

Let $E = \{E : \text{there is a countable subfamily } A_E \text{ of } A \text{ such that } E \text{ belongs to the } \delta$-ring generated by $A_E\}$. If $\{E_n\}_n$ is a sequence in $E

The most important $\sigma$-field is the Borel field of $\mathbb{R}$, denoted $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$. It is defined to be the $\sigma$-field for $\mathbb{R}$ that is generated by the family of all open subsets of $\mathbb{R}$. It is also the $\sigma$-field generated by the closed sets, or the compact sets, or the closed intervals $[a:b]$, or the open intervals or by $\mathcal{B}^{\delta}(\mathbb{R})$. The Borel field of $\mathbb{R}$ is also the $\sigma$-ring generated by any one of these families of setsÔÇöthis $\sigma$-ring is, in fact, a $\sigma$-field.

The Borel field $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^*)$ of $\mathbb{R}^*$, the extended set of real numbers, is the $\sigma$-field generated by the family of all open subsets of $\mathbb{R}^*$. Of course there are other descriptions of $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^*)$ and $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$. For example, $A \in \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^*)$ iff $A \cap \mathbb{R} \in \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$, and $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}) = (\mathcal{B}^{\delta}(\mathbb{R}))_{\sigma}$, the family of countable unions of members of the Borel $\delta$-ring (the $\delta$-ring generated by the compact sets).

Here is a description of $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$ and of $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^*)$ that we will need presently.

2 LEMMA The Borel field $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$ is the $\sigma$-field generated by sets of the form $(-\infty:r)$ with $r$ rational (or alternatively, of the form $(-\infty:r],$ or $(r:\infty),$ or $[r:\infty))$.

The Borel field $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^*)$ is similarly generated by sets $[-\infty:r)$ (or $[-\infty:r],$ or $[r:\infty],$ or $[r:\infty])$.

PROOF We prove only that the $\sigma$-ring $\mathcal{A}$ generated by $\{(-\infty:r):r\text{ rational}\}$ generates

(ii) The family $\mathcal{T} = \{ f^{-1}[B] : B \in \mathcal{B} \}$ is a $\sigma$-field and $f$ is $\mathcal{A} - \mathcal{B}$ measurable iff $\mathcal{A} \supset \mathcal{T}$.

(iii) If $f$ is $\mathcal{A} - \mathcal{B}$ measurable and $g$ is $\mathcal{B} - \mathcal{C}$ measurable, then $g \circ f$ is $\mathcal{A} - \mathcal{C}$ measurable.

Thus $\mathcal{Q}$ is the largest $\sigma$-field for $Y$ that makes $f \mathcal{A} - \mathcal{Q}$ measurable, and $\mathcal{T}$ is the smallest $\sigma$-field for $X$ that makes $f \mathcal{T} - \mathcal{B}$ measurable.

Here is a particular case of part (i) of the preceding proposition. Suppose $f^{-1}[G] \in \mathcal{A}$ for all members $G$ of a family $\mathcal{G}$ of sets that generates $\mathcal{B}$. Then $\mathcal{G}$, and hence $\mathcal{B}$, are subfamilies of $\mathcal{Q}$, and so $f$ is $\mathcal{A} - \mathcal{B}$ measurable. For example, if $f$ is a continuous real valued function on $\mathbb{R}$ then $f^{-1}[V]$ is open for each set $V$, and such open sets $V$ generate the Borel $\sigma$-field $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$, so $f$ is $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}) - \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$ measurable. If $f: \mathbb{R}^m \to \mathbb{R}^n$, and the Borel $\sigma$-field $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^n)$ is defined to be the $\sigma$-field that is generated by the family of open subsets of $\mathbb{R}^n$, then the same argument shows that $f$ is $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^m) - \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^n)$ measurable provided $f$ is continuous.

4 COROLLARY If $f^{-1}[G] \in \mathcal{A}$ for all members $G

$(X \times Y, \mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{B})$ where $\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{B}$ is the $\sigma$-field generated by the family $\{A \times B : A \in \mathcal{A}$ and $B \in \mathcal{B}\}$ of ÔÇťrectanglesÔÇŁ. (Notice that $\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{B}$ is also the $\delta$-ring generated by the family of rectangles.)

Here are the properties of $\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{B}$ that we will need.

5 PROPOSITION If $(X, \mathcal{A})$ and $(Y, \mathcal{B})$ are borel spaces, then

(i) the product $\sigma$-field $\mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{B}$ is the smallest that makes the projections $P_1 : X \times Y \rightarrow X$ and $P_2 : X \times Y \rightarrow Y$ measurable,

(ii) $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}) \otimes \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$ is the Borel $\sigma$-field $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^2)$, and

(iii) if $(Z, \mathcal{C})$ is a borel space and $f : Z \rightarrow X \times Y$, then $f$ is $\mathcal{C} - \mathcal{A} \otimes \mathcal{B}$ measurable iff $P_1 \circ f$ and $P_2 \circ f$ are respectively, $\mathcal{C} - \mathcal{A}$ and $\mathcal{C} - \mathcal{B}$ measurable.

PROOF Part (i) has already been established.

The projections $P_1 : \mathbb{R} \times \mathbb{R} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ and $P_2 : \mathbb{R} \times \mathbb{R} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ are continuous and hence $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^2) - \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$ measurable, so by part (i), $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^2) \supset \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}) \otimes \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$. On the other hand, $\mathcal{B}(\

+ $\circ [h, k] = h + k$, $T \circ [h, k] = hk$, $\bigvee \circ [h, k] = h \vee k$, $\bigwedge \circ [h, k] = h \wedge k$ and $\bigwedge \circ [h, 1] = h \wedge 1$ are $\mathcal{A}$ measurable. Finally, $r \mapsto |r|^p$ is continuous and hence $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}) - \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$ measurable, and if $i(r) = 1$ for $r \neq 0$ and $i(0) = 1$ then a direct verification shows that $i$ is $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}) - \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$ measurable. If follows that $|h|^p$ and, for $h$ non-vanishing, $1/h$, are $\mathcal{A}$ measurable.

Each assertion of the preceding theorem remains correct if "measurable" is replaced everywhere by "continuous". No assertion of the following theorem has that property. We recall that if $\{f_n\}_n$ is a sequence of real* valued functions then $\inf_n f_n$ is the function whose value at any point $x$ is $\inf_n \{f_n(x)\}$. That is, $(\inf_n f_n)(x) = \inf_n f_n(x)$. Similarly $(\sup_n f_n)(x) = \sup_n f_n(x)$, $(\lim \inf_n f_n)(x) = \lim \inf_n f_n(x)$ and $(\lim \sup_n f_n)(x) = \lim \sup_n f_n(x)$.

7 THEOREM If $\{f_n\}_n$ is a sequence of real* valued $\mathcal{A}$ measurable functions then $\inf_n f_n$, $\sup_n f_n$, $\lim \inf_n f_n$ and $\lim \sup_n f_n$ are all $\mathcal{A}$ measurable. In particular, if $\{f_n\}_n$ converges pointwise to $f$ then $f$ is $\mathcal{A}$ measurable.

PROOF We first show that for each real number $a$ the set

positive and each $F_n$ is of the form $[a:b)$ with $0 < a < b$, or $F_n = \{\infty\}$. Lastly we notice that $\chi_F(f(x)) = \chi_{f^{-1}[F]}(x)$.

For each function $f$ on $X$ to $\mathbb{R}^*$ let $\mathcal{F}_f$ consist of $\{f^{-1}[\infty]\}$ and all sets $f^{-1}[a:b)$ with $0 < a < b$, and let $\mathcal{G}_f$ consist of $\{f^{-1}[\infty]\}$ and sets $f^{-1}(a:b)$, $0 < a < b$. The preceding paragraph shows that $f^+$ is $\mathcal{F}_f \sigma^+$-simple, and a similar argument (but use non-terminating dyadic expansions) shows $f^+$ is $\mathcal{G}_f \sigma^+$-simple. Thus:

8 REPRESENTATION LEMMA If $f$ is a real* valued function, then $f^+$ is both $\mathcal{F}_f$ and $\mathcal{G}_f \sigma^+$-simple, and $f$ is both $\mathcal{F}_f$ and $\mathcal{G}_f \sigma$-simple.

Consequently, if $\mathcal{A}$ is a $\sigma$-field, then a real* valued function $f$ is $\mathcal{A} \sigma$-simple iff it is $\mathcal{A}$ measurable.

There is also a measure theoretic characterization of the $\mathcal{A} \sigma$-simple functions when $\mathcal{A}$ is a $\delta$-ring. A set $B$ is locally $\mathcal{A}$ measurable iff $A \cap B \in \mathcal{A}$ for each member $A$ of $\mathcal{A}$. It is straightforward to verify that the family $\mathcal{LA}(X)$ (or simply $\mathcal{LA}$) of locally $\mathcal{A}$ measurable subsets of $X$ is a $\sigma$-field for $X$. A real* valued function $f$ on $X$ is locally $\mathcal{A}$ measurable iff it is $\mathcal{LA}$ measurable. Each $\mathcal{A} \sigma$-simple function is $\

If $f^{-1}[B] \in \mathcal{A}_{\sigma}$ for each $B$ in $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^*)$ with $0 \notin B$, then $f^{-1}[B] \in \mathcal{A}_{\sigma}$ for sets $B$ of each of the forms: $[a:b)$ or $(-b:-a)$ with $0 < a < b \leq \infty$, $\{\infty\}$ or $\{- \infty\}$. Hence, by the representation lemma 8, $f$ is $\mathcal{A}_{\sigma}$ $\sigma$-simple or, if $f \geq 0$, $\mathcal{A}_{\sigma}$ $\sigma^+$-simple. But each member of $\mathcal{A}_{\sigma}$ is the union of a disjoint sequence in $\mathcal{A}$, and so $f$ is $\mathcal{A}$ $\sigma$-simple and, if $f \geq 0$, $\mathcal{A}$ $\sigma^+$-simple.

We saw in chapter 4 that each integral induces a measure. We will show, after a lemma, that each pre-integral $I$ induces pre-measure that completely determines the minimal integral extension of $I$.

10 LEMMA If $f: X \to \mathbb{R}^*$ and $a \in \mathbb{R}$, then $\{n(f \wedge a - f \wedge (a - n^{-1}))\}_n$ is a decreasing sequence that converges pointwise to $\chi_{\{x: f(x) \geq a\}}$, and $\{n(f \wedge (a + n^{-1}) - f \wedge a)\}_n$ is increasing and converges to $\chi_{\{x: f(x) > a\}}$.

PROOF For each $x$, $n(f(x) \wedge a - f(x) \wedge (a - n^{-1}))$ is 0 for $f(x) \leq a - n^{-1}$, 1 for $f(x) \geq a$, and is $n(f(x) - (a - n^{-1})) = 1 - n(a - f(x))$ for $a - n^{-1} \leq f(x) \leq a$. It follows that $\{n(f \w

If $I$ is itself an integral, then $f \in L$ iff $f(x) = \sum_n a_n \chi_{A_n}(x)$ for all $x$, for some $\{a_n\}_n$ in $\mathbb{R}$ and $\{A_n\}_n$ in $\mathcal{T}$ such that $\sum_n |a_n| \mu(A_n) < \infty$, and in this case $I(f) = \sum_n a_n \mu(A_n)$.

The foregoing characterization of $L$ and $I$ suggests a direct construction of an integral from a measure. We examine this construction in detail in the next chapter.

Finally, let us suppose that $I$ is a pre-integral on $L$ and $\mathcal{T}$ is its truncation $\delta$-ring, and let $L_{\sigma}$, the Baire family of $L$, be $\{f: f$ is real valued and $\mathcal{T}$ $\sigma$-simple\}. In view of theorem 9, $L_{\sigma}$ is a vector function lattice with truncation and is closed under pointwise sequential convergence. It follows from the definition of integral, that if $I^1$ on $L^1$ is the Daniell extension of $I$ on $L$, $L_1 = L^1 \cap L_{\sigma}$ and $I_1 = I^1 | L_1$, then $I_1$ is an integral. In view of theorem 11, every integral $J$ on $M$ that extends $I$ also extends $I_1$. Thus

12 COROLLARY Each pre-integral $I$ on $L$ has a minimal integral extension $I_1 = I^1 | L^1 \cap L_{\sigma}$; that is, every integral extension of $I$ is an extension of $I_1$.

The minimal extension of a pre-integral is generally not null complete. We have seen (proposition 3.7) that the smallest null complete integral extension of a pre-integral is its Daniell extension.

SUPPLEMENT: STANDARD BOREL SPACES

A Polish space is a topological space that is homeomorphic to a complete metric separable space $X$, and its Borel field $\mathcal{B}(X)$ is the $\sigma

condensed, and that a convenient cover for a set $B$ is a sequence $\{A_n\}_n$ of convenient sets such that $A_{n+1} \setminus A_n \neq \emptyset$ for all $n$ and $B = \bigcup_n A_n$.

13 LEMMA If $B$ is open in a convenient subset $A$ of $X$, $B \neq \emptyset$ and $e > 0$, then there is a convenient cover $\{A_n\}_n$ of $B$ consisting of sets of diameter less than $e$.

PROOF For each $x$ in $B$ there is an open neighborhood $V$ of $x$ in $A$ of diameter less than $e$ whose closure $V^-$ is a subset of $B$, so $V^-$ is a convenient neighborhood of $x$ of diameter less than $e$. The set $B$ can be covered by a sequence of such convenient subsets, and after discarding each member of the sequence that is covered by its predecessors, we have either a convenient cover as desired, or a finite sequence covering $B$, say $A_1, A_2, \ldots A_n$. Since $dia A_n < e$, the proof of the lemma reduces to showing that $A_n \setminus \bigcup_{k < n} A_k$ has a convenient cover. In other words, we need only show that if $B$ is an open non-void subset of a convenient set $A$ then $B$ has a convenient cover.

Suppose $A$ is a convenient set, $C$ is a closed subset and $B = A \setminus C \neq \emptyset$. If $A_n$ is the closure of $\{x: dist(x, C) > 1/n\}$ then $A_n$ is a convenient set and $B = \bigcup_n A_n$. If we omit repetitions from the sequence $A_1, A_2, \ldots A_n$, then the result is either a convenient cover for $B$ or a finite sequence. In case of the latter, $B = A_n$ for some $n$, and the proof reduces to showing that a convenient set $B$ has a convenient cover.

Suppose then that $B$ is

of $B(n_1, \ldots, n_k)$, and $A(n_1, \ldots, n_k)$ has diameter less than $1/k$. Consequently, for each member $v = \{v_k\}_k$ of $\mathbb{N}^\infty$, $\bigcap_k B(v_1, \ldots, v_k) = \bigcap_k A(v_1, \ldots, v_k)$, and since $\{A(v_1, \ldots, v_k)\}_k$ is a decreasing sequence of closed sets whose diameters tend to zero, this intersection consists of a single point of $X$. We define $F(v)$ to be this point.

If $v$ and $\eta$ are members of $\mathbb{N}^\infty$ that agree for the first $k$ coordinates, then $dist(F(v), F(\eta)) < 1/k$ because both $F(v)$ and $F(\eta)$ belong to $A(v_1, \ldots, v_k) = A(\eta_1, \ldots, \eta_k)$. Consequently $F$ is continuous and so is a Borel mapping.

The family $\{B(n)\}_n$ is a disjoint cover of $X$, $\{B(n_1, \ldots, n_k, p)\}_p$ is disjoint cover of $B(n_1, \ldots, n_k)$ for all $n_1, \ldots, n_k$, and hence for each $q$ the family of all sets $B(n_1, \ldots, n_q)$ is a disjoint cover of $X$. A member $x$ of $X$ is then $F(v)$ where $v$ is the unique sequence such that $x \in B(v_1, \ldots, v_q)$ for each $q$, and so $F$ is a one to one map of $\mathbb{N}^\infty$ onto $X$.

Finally, the set $V(n_1, \ldots, n_k) = \{v: v_i = n_i \text{ for } i = 1, \ldots, k\}$ is open in $\mathbb{N}^\infty$, the family of such sets is a base for the topology of $\mathbb{N}^\infty$ and $F[V(n