

CHAPTER II §2

1. Expand $1/(1 - q^{-s})$ in a geometric series; then multiply out, and use the fact that every positive integer $n$ can be written (uniquely) as $q_1^{\alpha_1} \cdots q_r^{\alpha_r}$.

4. Define $f(t) = \frac{1}{2}t + t/(e^t - 1)$ and show that

2. Claim: $\mu(U) = 0$ for any $U$ if $\mu$ has this property. Since $U$ is a union of sets of the form $a + (p^N)$ for $N$ arbitrarily large, we have for such $N$: $|\mu(U)|_p \leq \max_a |\mu(a + (p^N))|_p$. Now let $N \to \infty$.

3. $B_k; p^{k-1}B_k; (1 - p^{k-1})B_k$.

5. $(1 - \alpha^{-k})B_k; (1 - \alpha^{-k})(1 - p^{k-1})B_k; \sum_{i=0}^{n} a_i(1 - \alpha^{-i-1})(1 - p^i)B_{i+1}/(i+1)$.

7. Use the corollary at the end of §5 with $g(x) = 1/(\text{the first digit in } x)$, so that $f(x) \equiv g(x) \bmod p$, and $g(x)$ is locally constant.

9. $$\lim_{N \to \infty} \sum_{a=a_0 + a_2p^2 + \cdots + a_{2M}p^{2M}} a/p^{M+1}$$

$$= \lim_{M \to \infty} \frac{1}{p^{M+1}} \left( p^M \sum_{a_0=0}^{p-1} a_0 + p^M \sum_{a_2=0}^{p-1} a_2p^2 + \cdots + p^M \sum_{a_{2M}=0}^{p-1} a_{2M}p^{2M} \right)$$

$$= \frac{p-1}{2} (1 + p^2 + p^4 + \cdots) = -\frac{1}{2(p+1)}$$

CHAPTER II §7

2. (i) Use the Kummer congruence $(1 - 5^{2-1})(-B_2/2) \equiv (1 - 5^{102-1})(-B_{102}/

Answers and hints for the exercises

3. $(1 + j)^{\text{any odd power}}$ is a generator.

4. Adjoin a root $j$ of $X^2 + X + 1 = 0$ and $X^3 + X + 1 = 0$, respectively. For example, in $\mathbb{F}_8$ we multiply as follows:

$$\begin{align*}
(a + bj + cj^2)(d + ej + fj^2) &= (ad + bf + ce) + (ae + bd + bf + ce + cf)j \\
&+ (af + be + cd + cf)j^2.
\end{align*}$$

Finally, note that when $q - 1$ is prime, any element (not 1) of $\mathbb{F}_q^x$ is a generator.

5. Clearly $\mathbb{F}_p(a) = \mathbb{F}_q$.

6. If any two of the $\sigma_i$ were the same, you would get a polynomial of degree less than $q$ having $q$ roots.

7. If $P(X)$ factored over $\mathbb{F}_p$, say, $P(X) = P_1(X)P_2(X)$ with $\deg P_1 = d < p$, then the coefficient of $X^{d-1}$ in $P_1(X)$, which is minus the sum of $d$ of the roots $a + i$, would be in $\mathbb{F}_p$. But then $da \in \mathbb{F}_p$, and so $a \in \mathbb{F}_p$. But all elements of $\mathbb{F}_p$ are roots of $X^p - X$, and so cannot be roots of $P(X)$.

8. If $p = 2$, then $-1 = 1$ and it's trivial; otherwise $\mathbb{F}_q$ contains a square root of $-1$ if and only if 1 has a primitive fourth root, i.e., if and only if 4 divides $q - 1$.

9. Assume the contrary, and use the same approach as in Exercise 19 of §I.2 and Exercise 20 of §I.5.

10. First show, without using limits, that the

CHAPTER III §4

1. The values of $|_p$ on $\Omega$ are the same as on $\overline{\mathbb{Q}}_p$, since any element can be approximated by an element of $\overline{\mathbb{Q}}_p$. To show that, for example, the unit ball in $\overline{\mathbb{Q}}_p$ is not sequentially compact, take any sequence of distinct roots of unity of order prime to $p$ and show that it has no convergent subsequence.

2. Let $r_0 = |b - a|_p$. You get the empty set unless $r$ is a sum $r_1 + r_2$ of two rational powers of $p$ (or zero). Then consider cases depending on the relative size of $r_0, r_1, r_2$. For example, if $r_0 = r_1 > r_2$, then you get the two disjoint circles of radius $r_2$ about $a$ and $b$. The "hyperbola" has exactly the same possibilities; now $r = r_1 - r_2$ must be a difference of two rational powers of $p$.

3. Let $C_1 = \max(1, C_0)$. Suppose $\beta$ is a root with $|\beta|_p > C_1$. Then $\beta = -b_{n-1} - b_{n-2}/\beta - \cdots - b_0/\beta^{n-1}$, and $|\beta|_p \leq \max(|b_{n-i-1}/\beta^i|_p) \leq \max(|b_i|_p) = C_0$, a contradiction.

4. Set $\delta = \min|\alpha - \alpha_i|_p$, where the minimum is over all roots $\alpha_i \neq \alpha$ of $f$. Use the last proposition in this section with the roles of $\delta$ and $\varepsilon$ reversed to find a root $\beta$ of $g$ such that $|\alpha - \beta|_p < \delta$. By Krasner's lemma, $K(\alpha) \subset K(\beta)$. Since $f$ is irreducible, $[K(\alpha):K] = \deg f = \deg g \

Then $\beta = b - 1$ satisfies: $|\beta|_p < 1$, and at the same time $0 = ((\beta + 1)^l - 1)/\beta = \sum_{i=2}^{l} \binom{i}{i} \beta^{i-1} + l$. But then $|l|_p = |\beta| - \sum_{i=2}^{l} \binom{i}{i} \beta^{i-2}|_p < 1$, a contradiction.

8. Let $\pi$ be an element of $K$ with ord$_p \pi = 1/e$, where $e$ is the ramification index of $K$. Then $\{\pi^i\}_{i=0,1,\dots,m-1}$ are in distinct multiplicative cosets modulo $(K^\times)^m$, and any element of $K^\times$ can be written uniquely as $\pi^{i+m}u$ for some $0 \leq i < m, j \in \mathbb{Z}, u \in K$ with $|u|_p = 1$. Now show that $u$ is an $m$th power. Namely, since its image in the residue field $\mathbb{F}_q$ is an $m$th power, we can find $u_0$ such that $\alpha = u/u_0^m - 1$ satisfies $|\alpha|_p < 1$. Finally, write the $p$-adic expansion $1/m = a_0 + a_1p + a_2p^2 + \dots$, and obtain

$$u = u_0^m (1 + \alpha) = (u_0 (1 + \alpha)^{a_0 + a_1p + a_2p^2 + \dots})^m.$$

10. Otherwise, $K$ would have residue degree $f > 1$, since it would have more than $p - 1$ roots of unity of order prime to $p$, and any two such roots have distinct residues in $\mathbb{F}_{pf}^\times$.

11. All have the cardinality of the continuum.

12. Let $y_1, \dots, y_f$ be elements in $K

3. A counterexample for the last question: let $f_j = 1 + pX$ if $j$ is a power of 2, and let $f_j = 1$ otherwise. Then $f(X) = \prod_{k=0}^{\infty} (1 + pX^{2k}) = \sum_{j=0}^{\infty} p^{S_j}X^j$, where $S_j$ denotes the sum of the binary digits in $j$; this does not converge on $D(1)$.

4. Let $d(x, \mathbb{Z}_p) = \min\{|x - y|_p |y \in \mathbb{Z}_p\}$, i.e., the "distance" from $x$ to $\mathbb{Z}_p$. First prove that if $d(x, \mathbb{Z}_p) \geq 1$, then the series converges, in fact, it converges under a much weaker condition on $|a_n|_p$. Now suppose that $d(x, \mathbb{Z}_p) = r < 1$. Choose $M$ so that $p^{-(M+1)} \leq r < p^{-M}$. Then for $n = p^N$ with $N > M$, show that: $p^N - p^{N-1}$ of the factors in the denominator of the $n$th term are of norm 1, $p^{N-1} - p^{N-2}$ of the factors are of norm $1/p$, $p^{N-2} - p^{N-3}$ of the factors are of norm $1/p^2$, and so on, and finally $p^{N-M} - p^{N-M-1}$ of the factors are of norm $1/p^M$, and the remaining $p^{N-M-1}$ factors are of norm $r$. Use this to give a lower bound for the ord$_p$ of the $n$th term, namely,

$$\text{ord}_p a_n + \text{ord}_p n! - (p^{N-1} - p^{N-2}) - 2(p^{N-2} - p^{N-3}) - \cdots$$
$$- M(p^{N-M} - p^{N-M-1}) - (M +

Answers and hints for the exercises

12. The series $(x \, d/dx)^k 1/(1 - x) = \sum n^k x^n$ represents a polynomial in $\mathbb{Z}[X]$ divided by $(1 - X)^{k+1}$ in its disc of convergence, in both the real and $p$-adic situations. In particular, for $x = p$ you get an integer divided by $(p - 1)^{k+1}$.

13. The left side is $-\log_3(1 + \frac{9}{16}) = -\log_3(\frac{25}{16})$; the right side is $-2 \log_3(1 - \frac{9}{4}) = -\log_3((- \frac{5}{4})^2) = -\log_3(\frac{25}{16})$.

14. As an example where the exact regions of convergence differ, take $f(X) = \sum X^{p^n}$. Then $f(X)$ converges on $D(1^-)$ and $f'(X)$ converges on $D(1)$.

15. (a) For example, $\sum_{i=1}^{\infty} i!/p_i^i$, where $p_i$ denotes the $i$th prime. (b) I don’t know of an example, or of a proof that it’s impossible.

17. For each rational number $r = a/b \in \mathbb{Q}$, make a choice of $p^r \in \Omega$, i.e., choose a root of $x^b - p^a = 0$ and denote it $p^r$. Now take, for example, $f(x) = p^{(\text{ord}_p x)^2}$.

18. No.

20. If you want each coefficient to $j$ places, choose $N$ so that $p^N > Mp^{j-1}$; write $a/b \in \mathbb{Z}_p$ modulo $p^N$ in the form $a_0 + a_1 p + \cdots + a_{N-1} p^{N-1}$; and compute the coefficients of $(1 + X)^{a

13. On the right side of property (3), we have $s_0 = p - r$, $s_1 = (p - 1 - r)/(1 - p)$. Note that the expression is congruent to $m^{1-s_0} \bmod p$; then it remains to verify that the $(p-1)th$ power is 1. Use: $(p-1)s_1 = 1 - p + r = 1 - s_0$.

14. In all cases show that the image of the function is in the open unit disc about 1.

15. $1 + X + X^2 + \frac{2}{3}X^3 + \frac{2}{3}X^4; 1 + X + \frac{1}{2}X^2 + \frac{1}{2}X^3 + \frac{3}{8}X^4$.

16. The coefficient of $X^p$ is $(p-1)! + 1)/p!$; Wilson’s theorem.

17. $E_p(X^p)/E_p(X)^p = e^{-pX} \in 1 + pX\mathbb{Z}_p[[X]]$.

18. $f(X^p)/f(X)^p = \exp(\sum_{i=0}^{\infty} (b_{i-1} - pb_i)X^{p^i})$. If $c_i \equiv b_{i-1} - pb_i \in p\mathbb{Z}_p$ for all $i$, then since $e^{cX} \in 1 + pX\mathbb{Z}_p[[X]]$ whenever $c \in p\mathbb{Z}_p$, it follows that

$$\prod e^{c_iX^{p^i}} \in 1 + pX\mathbb{Z}_p[[X]].$$

Conversely, suppose $c_{i_0}$ is the first $c_i$ not in $p\mathbb{Z}_p$; then the coefficient of $X^{p^{i_0}}$ in $\prod e^{c_iX^{p^i}}$ is congruent mod $p$ to $c_{i_0} \neq 0 \bmod p$, and by Dwork’s

Answers and hints for the exercises

(viii) Starting with a segment from $(0, 0)$ to $(2, 2)$, there are infinitely many segments with slope increasing toward $\sqrt{2}$; the details of these segments depend upon rational approximations to $\sqrt{2}$.

5. The Newton polygon of $1 + \sum_{i=1}^{\infty} p^{1+[i\sqrt{2}]} X^i$ is the infinite line from $(0, 0)$ with slope $\sqrt{2}$.

6. For example, $\sum_{i=0}^{\infty} p^i X^{p-i}$ converges on $D(1)$, its Newton polygon is the horizontal line from $(0, 0)$, and it has no zero in $D(1)$.

8. Reduce to the case $\lambda = 0$ by replacing $f(X)$ by $f(p^{-\lambda} X)$, where $p^{\lambda}$ is a choice of fractional power of $p$ in $\Omega$. Then multiply by a scalar to reduce to the case when

$$\min \text{ord}_p a_i = 0.$$

For $x \in D(1)$ clearly $|f(x)|_p \leq 1$. To obtain an $x$ for which $|f(x)|_p = 1$, it suffices to reduce modulo the maximal ideal of $\Omega$, i.e., to consider the series $\vec{f}(X) \in \bar{\mathbb{F}}_p[X]$.

(This has only finitely many terms, because $\text{ord}_p a_i \to \infty$.) Then choose any $x$ such that $\vec{f}(\bar{x}) \neq 0$ in $\bar{\mathbb{F}}_p$.

9. Apply the Weierstrass Preparation Theorem to the series $f_1(X) = f(X)/a_n X^n \in 1 + X\Omega[[X]]$ which is obtained by dividing $f(X)$ by its leading term $a_n X^n$. Take $\lambda = 0$.

10. Reduce to the case $f(X) \in 1 + X\Omega[[X]]$ by factoring out the leading term, as in

6. Let $Q(T) = \prod (1 - \alpha_i T)$, $P(T) = \prod (1 - \beta_i T)$; these are both in $\mathbb{Q}[T]$; then $\exp(\sum N_s T^s/s) = P(T)/Q(T)$. The converse is shown by reversing this procedure.

7. Comparing coefficients of $T$ gives $a = N_1 - 1 - q$, where $N_1 = \# \tilde{E}(\mathbb{F}_q)$; by Exercise 6, $N_s = 1 + q^s - \alpha_1^s - \alpha_2^s$, where $\alpha_1, \alpha_2$ are given by $(1 + aT + qT^2) = (1 - \alpha_1 T)(1 - \alpha_2 T)$.

8. (i) For $q \equiv 2$ (mod 3), every element of $\mathbb{F}_q$ has a unique cube root; then show that $N_1 = q + 1$, so that $a = 0$, and the zeta-function is $(1 + qT^2)/(1 - T)(1 - qT)$.

(ii) For $q \equiv 3$ (mod 4), $-1$ does not have a square root. Then for exactly one from each pair $x_1 = a, x_1 = -a$ we have a solution to $x_2 = \pm \sqrt{x_1^3 - x_1}$; this gives a one-to-one correspondence between $a \in \mathbb{F}_q$ and points $(x_1, x_2)$ on the affine curve. Counting the point at infinity, we obtain $N = q + 1$, as in part (i), and the zeta-function is $(1 + qT^2)/(1 - T)(1 - qT)$. Next, for $q = 9 = 3^2$, we have $N_1 = (the N_2$ when $q = 3) = 16$, $a = 6$, $Z(T) = (1 + 3T)^2/(1 - T)(1 - 9T)$. For $q = 5$

Answers and hints for the exercises