

CHAPTER 5

CLASSIFICATION OF COXETER GROUPS

5.1 COXETER GRAPHS

We continue to assume that $\mathcal{G} \leq \mathcal{O}(V)$ is a Coxeter group with root system $\Delta$, and that $\Pi = \{r_1, \ldots, r_n\}$ is a $t$-base for some $t \in V$. As before, the fundamental reflection along $r_i$ will be denoted by $S_i$.

Proposition 5.1.1

If $r_i, r_j \in \Pi$, then there is an integer $p_{ij} \geq 1$ such that

$$\left(r_i, r_j\right) / \left\| r_i \right\| \left\| r_j \right\| = -\cos(\pi/p_{ij})$$

In fact, $p_{ij}$ is the order of $S_i S_j$ as a group element.

Proof

If $i = j$, we may take $p_{ij} = 1$. Assume then that $i \neq j$, and denote by $W$ the two-dimensional subspace of $V$ spanned by $r_i$ and $r_j$. Let $\mathcal{H}$ be the subgroup of $\mathcal{G}$ spanned by $S_i$ and $S_j$. Since $S_i | W^\perp = S_j | W^\perp = 1$, $\mathcal{H}$ has the form of a direct product $\mathcal{H}_2^m \times 1$, where $\mathcal{H}_2^m$ is a dihedral group in $\mathcal{O}(W)$. If we write $t = t_1 + t_2$, with $t_1 \in W$ and $t_2 \in W^\perp$, let us show that $\{r_i, r_j\}$ is a $t_1$-base for $\mathcal{H}_2^m$ in $W$. If it is not, then we may choose a root $r$ of $\mathcal{H}_2^m$ in $W$ such that $\{r, r_j\}$ is a $t'_1$-base for $\mathcal{H}_2^m$ for some $t'_1

We may ignore the factor $1/\|r_1\| \|r_2\|$, since we are still assuming that all roots are unit vectors. The acute angle $\varphi$ between the basis vectors dual to the fundamental roots $r_i$ and $r_j$ in $W$ must be $2\pi/2m$, since the interior of the simplicial cone they span is a fundamental region for $\mathcal{H}_2^m$. If $\theta$ is the least angle between $r_i$ and $r_j$, then $\theta = \pi - \varphi$. Set $p_{ij} = m$. Then

$$\begin{align*}
(r_i, r_j) &= \cos \theta = \cos(\pi - \varphi) \\
&= -\cos \varphi = -\cos(\pi/p_{ij}).
\end{align*}$$

The second statement of the proposition is a consequence of Exercise 2.5.

A marked graph is a finite set of points (called nodes) such that any two distinct points may or may not be joined by a line (called a branch), with the following property: If there is a branch joining the $i$th and $j$th nodes, then that branch is marked, or labeled, with a real number $p_{ij} > 2$. If $G$ is a marked graph for which every mark $p_{ij}$ is an integer, then $G$ is called a Coxeter graph.

If $G$ is a marked graph, then as a matter of convenience we shall usually suppress the label on any branch for which $p_{ij} = 3$.

Readers familiar with the theory of Lie algebras will observe similarities between the notions of Coxeter graphs and Dynkin diagrams. We remark in passing that a Dynkin diagram is a Coxeter graph with the further restriction that $p_{ij} = 3, 4$, or 6, in which branches marked 4 are replaced by double branches and branches marked 6 are replaced by triple branches.

If $G$ is a marked graph with $m$ nodes, we may associate with $G$ a quadratic form $Q = Q_G$ on $\mathcal{R}^m$ as follows:

$$Q(\lambda_1, \ldots, \lambda_m) = \sum_{i,j} \alpha_{

ith and jth nodes. If we set $x = (\lambda_1, \ldots, \lambda_m) \in \mathbb{R}^m$, observe that $Q(x) = (Ax, x)$.

A marked graph will be called positive definite if and only if its associated quadratic form is positive definite.

The graph $G$ in Figure 5.2 is an example of a Coxeter graph, with the nodes labeled from 1 to 4. The matrix defining the associated quadratic form on $\mathbb{R}^4$ is

$$A = \begin{bmatrix}
1 & -1/2 & -\cos(\pi/17) & 0 \\
-1/2 & 1 & -\cos(\pi/9) & 0 \\
-\cos(\pi/17) & -\cos(\pi/9) & 1 & -1/2 \\
0 & 0 & -1/2 & 1
\end{bmatrix}.$$

If $\{x_1, x_2, \ldots, x_m\}$ is any finite set of mutually obtuse vectors in $V$, we may define a marked graph $G$ as follows: Let $G$ have $m$ nodes, and if $i \neq j$ the ith and jth nodes are joined by a branch if and only if $(x_i, x_j) \neq 0$. In that case we may write $(x_i, x_j) / \|x_i\| \|x_j\| = -\cos(\pi/p_{ij})$ for exactly one real number $p_{ij} > 2$, and the branch is labeled $p_{ij}$.

If $\mathcal{G}$ is a Coxeter group, then the marked graph $G$ corresponding to the $t$-base $\Pi = \{r_1, \ldots, r_n\}$ is a Coxeter graph, by Proposition 5.1.1, and $G$ is called the Coxeter graph of $\mathcal{G}$.

Theorem 5.1.2

If $\mathcal{G}_1, \mathcal{G}_2 \leq \mathcal{O}(V)$ are Coxeter groups having the same Coxeter graph, then $\mathcal{G}_1$ and $\mathcal{G}_2

$$\Pi_1 = \{r_1, \ldots, r_n\} \quad \text{and} \quad \Pi_2 = \{r'_1, \ldots, r'_n\}$$

with $(r_i, r_j) = (r'_i, r'_j)$ for all $i$ and $j$. Define $T: V \rightarrow V$ by setting $Tr_i = r'_i$, $1 \leq i \leq n$, and extending by linearity. Then $T \in \mathcal{O}(V)$ (see Exercise 5.2). If $S_i \in \mathcal{G}_1$ is the reflection along $r_i$ and $S'_i \in \mathcal{G}_2$ is the reflection along $r'_i$, then $S'_i = TS_i T^{-1}$ for each $i$ by Proposition 4.1.1 [with $\mathcal{G} = \mathcal{O}(V)$]. Since $\mathcal{G}_1$ is generated by the reflections $S_i$ and $\mathcal{G}_2$ by the reflections $S'_i$, the conclusion follows easily.

**Theorem 5.1.3**

The Coxeter graph of a Coxeter group is positive definite.

**Proof**

If roots are taken to be unit vectors, then the matrix $A$ defining the associated quadratic form has $ijth$ entry $(r_i, r_j)$. If $0 \neq x = (\lambda_1, \ldots, \lambda_n)$ in $\mathbb{R}^n$, then $\Sigma_i \lambda_i r_i \neq 0$ in $V$ since $\Pi$ is linearly independent. Thus

$$Q(x) = \Sigma_{i,j}(r_i, r_j) \lambda_i \lambda_j$$

$$= (\Sigma_i \lambda_i r_i, \Sigma_j \lambda_j r_j)$$

$$= \| \Sigma_i \lambda_i r_i \|^2 > 0;$$

so $Q$ is positive definite.

Suppose that $\Pi$ is the $t$-base of $\mathcal{G}$ and that $\Pi = \Pi_1 \cup \Pi_2$, with $\Pi_1

$a_{k-1}$ and $a_k$ are joined by a branch, and $a_k = b$. If every two distinct nodes of $G$ are connected in $G$, then $G$ is said to be connected. For example, the graph in Figure 5.2 is connected.

Proposition 5.1.4 is an immediate consequence of the foregoing definitions.

**Proposition 5.1.4**

The Coxeter graph of a Coxeter group $G$ is connected if and only if $G$ is irreducible.

In order to arrive eventually at a classification of all Coxeter subgroups of $\mathcal{O}(V)$, we shall classify all positive definite Coxeter graphs. As we observed above, it will suffice to consider only irreducible Coxeter groups, so we need only classify the connected positive definite Coxeter graphs.

Consider first the Coxeter graphs shown in Figure 5.3. The subscripts on the names of the graphs indicate the numbers of nodes. The graph $H_2^n$ is clearly the Coxeter graph of the dihedral group $\mathcal{H}_2^n$, so it is positive definite by Theorem 5.1.3. Note that $\mathcal{H}_2^2$ is a reducible group and that its Coxeter graph is simply two nodes with no branch joining them. To avoid repetitions we have not included the graphs of $\mathcal{H}_2^3, \mathcal{H}_2^4,$ and $\mathcal{H}_2^6$ among the graphs $H_2^n$, since their graphs are listed as $A_2, B_2,$ and $G_2$. It will become apparent in Section 5.2 why the graph of $\mathcal{H}_2^6$ has been singled out as $G_2$.

If $1 \leq k \leq n$, then the $k$th principal minor of an $n \times n$ matrix $A$ is the determinant of the $k \times k$ matrix obtained by deleting the last $n-k$

$$A_n, n \geq 1: \circ, \quad \cdots$$

$$B_n, n \geq 2: \quad \cdots$$

$$D_n, n \geq 4

rows and columns of $A$. For example, the first principal minor of $A$ is the first diagonal entry, and the $n$th principal minor is det $A$. For a real symmetric matrix (or its associated quadratic form) to be positive definite it is necessary and sufficient that all its principal minors be positive (for a proof see [17], p. 152, or [21], p. 167). We shall apply this criterion in order to show that the remaining graphs in Figure 5.3 are positive definite.

For each Coxeter graph $G$ the matrix of the associated quadratic form can be written down directly from the graph. It will be convenient to denote the matrix by the same name as the graph in each case.

For example, the matrix of $A_n$ is

$$
\begin{bmatrix}
1 & -1/2 & 0 & 0 & \dots \\
-1/2 & 1 & -1/2 & 0 & \dots \\
0 & -1/2 & 1 & -1/2 & \dots \\
0 & 0 & -1/2 & 1 & \dots \\
\dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots & \dots

subgraph $G \setminus \{a_1, a_2\}$ by $G_2$, and write $p$ for the mark $p_{12}$. Then

$$\det G = \det G_1 - (\cos^2 \pi/p) \det G_2.$$

Proof
The matrix $G$ has the form

$$\begin{bmatrix}
1 & -\cos \pi/p & 0 \\
-\cos \pi/p & 1 & * \\
0 & * & G_2
\end{bmatrix},$$

with $G_1 = \begin{bmatrix}
1 & * \\
* & G_2
\end{bmatrix}$. If $\tilde{G}$ denotes the matrix obtained from $G$ by deleting the first row and the second column then clearly $\det \tilde{G} = (-\cos \pi/p) \det G_2$. If we expand $\det G$ along the first row we find

$$\det G = \det G_1 + (\cos \pi/p) \det \tilde{G} \\
= \det G_1 - (\cos^2 \pi/p) \det G_2.$$

Since $G_1$ and $G_2$ have fewer vertices than $G$, Proposition 5.1.5 will enable us to apply induction in order to compute determinants. In some cases $G_2$ will not be connected, but then $\det G_2$ is simply the product of the determinants of its connected components (see Exercise 5.17).

We begin by discussing $A_n$ in detail. Note that $\det A_1 = 1 = 2/2$ and $\det A_2 = 3/2^2$. By Proposition 5.1.5 we have

$$\det A_n = \det A_{n-1} - 1/4 \det A_{n-2}$$

for $n \geq 2$. This recursion formula can be used to prove by induction that

$$\det A_n = (n + 1)/2^n$$

for all $n$. Assuming the result to hold for all $k < n$ (with $n \geq 2$) we have

$$\det A_n = \det

We find

$$\det B_n = \det A_{n-1} - (\sqrt{2}/2)^2 \det A_{n-2}$$
$$= n/2^{n-1} - (n-1)/2^{n-1} = 1/2^{n-1} > 0,$$

$$\det D_n = \det A_{n-1} - 1/4 \det A_{n-3}$$
$$= n/2^{n-1} - (n-2)/2^{n-1} = 1/2^{n-2} > 0,$$

$$\det I_3 = \det A_2 - \alpha^2 \det A_1$$
$$= 3/4 - \alpha^2 = (3 - \sqrt{5})/8 > 0,$$

$$\det I_4 = 1/2 - 3\alpha^2/4 = (7 - 3\sqrt{5})/32 > 0,$$

$$\det F_4 = \det B_3 - (1/4) \det A_2 = 1/16 > 0,$$

and for $n = 6, 7, 8$

$$\det E_n = \det D_{n-1} - 1/4 \det A_{n-2}$$
$$= 1/2^{n-3} - (n-1)/2^n = (9-n)/2^n > 0.$$

Thus all the graphs in Figure 5.3 are positive definite.

$$P_n, n \geq 3:$$
$$Q_n, n \geq 5:$$
$$S_n, n \geq 3:$$
$$T_n, n \geq 4:$$
$$U_3:$$
$$Z_4:$$
$$Y_5:$$
$$\cos \pi/q = 3/4$$
$$V_5:$$
$$R_7:$$
$$R_8:$$

Figure 5.4<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>

We shall show presently that the list in Figure 5.3 contains all the connected positive definite Coxeter graphs. To this end it is convenient to consider next an auxiliary list of marked graphs. The matrix of each graph in Figure 5.4 will be shown to have determinant zero, so that none of them are positive definite. Note that $4 < q < 5$, since $\cos \pi/q = 3/4$.

In the case of $P_n$ observe that the sum of all the rows is the zero vector so the rows are dependent and $\det P_n = 0$. The fact that $\det Z_4 = 0$ will be left as an exercise. For all the others we may apply Proposition 5.1.5, again with obvious choices for the nodes $a_1$ and $a_2$ (see Exercise 2.22 for $Y_5$):

$$\det Q_n = \det D_{n-1} - 1/4 \det D_{n-3} = 0,$$

$$\det S_n = \det B_{n-1} - 1/2 \det B_{n-2} = 0,$$

$$\det T_n = \det B_{n-1} - 1/4 \det B_{n-3} = 0,$$

$$\det U_3 = \det A_2 - 3/4 \det A_1 = 0,$$

$$\det Y_5 = \det I_4 - \beta^2 \det I_3$$

$$= 1/2 - 3\alpha^2/4 - \beta^2(3/4 - \alpha^2)$$

$$= 3(1 - 2\alpha + 2\beta)/16 = 0,$$

$$\det V_5 = \det B_4 - 1/4 \det A_3 = 0,$$

$$\det R_7 = \det E_6 - 1/4 \det A_5 = 0,$$

$$\det R_8 = \det E_7 - 1/4 \det D_6 = 0,$$

$$\det R_9 = \det E_8 - 1/4 \det E_7

If $x = (\lambda_1, \ldots, \lambda_k)$, set $y = (|\lambda_1|, \ldots, |\lambda_k|, 0, \ldots, 0) \in \mathbb{R}^m$. Then $y \neq 0$, and

$$0 \geq Q_H(x) = \Sigma_{i,j} \beta_{ij} \lambda_i \lambda_j$$

$$\geq \Sigma_{i,j} \beta_{ij} |\lambda_i| |\lambda_j|$$

$$\geq \Sigma_{i,j} \alpha_{ij} |\lambda_i| |\lambda_j| = Q_G(y) > 0,$$

a contradiction.

The importance of Proposition 5.1.6 lies in the fact that it shows that none of the graphs in Figure 5.4 can occur as subgraphs of positive definite Coxeter graphs.

Theorem 5.1.7

If $G$ is a connected positive definite Coxeter graph, then $G$ is one of the graphs $A_n, B_n, D_n, H_2^n, G_2, I_3, I_4, F_4, E_6, E_7$, or $E_8$.

Proof

Observe first that $G$ can have no cycles as subgraphs since no $P_n$ is positive definite. If $H_2^n$ is a subgraph of $G$ for any $n \geq 7$, then $G = H_2^n$, for otherwise $U_3$ would be a subgraph of $G$. Likewise, $G = G_2$ if $G_2$ is a subgraph. We may assume, then, for the remainder of the proof, that any branch of $G$ is marked 3, 4, or 5. Suppose that $B_2$ is a subgraph of $G$ (it cannot occur more than once; otherwise some $S_n$ would be a subgraph). Then $G$ cannot have a branch point, for otherwise some $T_n$ would be a subgraph. If $H_2^5$ is also a subgraph, then we may have $G = H_2^5$, $

J.2 THE CRYSTALLOGRAPHIC CONDITION

A lattice in $V$ is a set consisting of all integer linear combinations of the elements of some basis $\{x_1, \ldots, x_n\}$ for $V$. As in Section 2.6, a subgroup $\mathcal{G}$ of $\mathcal{O}(V)$ is said to satisfy the crystallographic condition, or to be a crystallographic group, if and only if there is a lattice $\mathcal{L}$ invariant under all transformations in $\mathcal{G}$.

We wish to determine the crystallographic Coxeter groups, and to that end it becomes convenient to allow the relative lengths of roots to differ. Thus we no longer assume that roots are unit vectors, and appropriate lengths will be assigned in the course of development. It is important to bear in mind that the formula for the reflection along a root $r$ has the form

$$S_r x = x - \frac{2(x, r) r}{(r, r)}$$

and that the factor $1/(r, r)$ cannot in general be omitted.

Suppose as usual that $\mathcal{G}$ is a Coxeter group, with base $\Pi = \{r_1, \ldots, r_n\}$ and fundamental reflections $S_1, \ldots, S_n$. The order of $S_i S_j$ will be denoted by $p_{ij}$ as in Proposition 5.1.1.

Proposition 5.2.1

If $\mathcal{G}$ is crystallographic, then each $p_{ij}$ is one of the integers 1, 2, 3, 4, or 6.

Proof

Fix $i$ and $j$ and set $p_{ij} = m$. With respect to a suitable basis, $S_i S_j$ is represented by the matrix

$$\begin{bmatrix} A \\ 0 \end{bmatrix} + \begin{bmatrix} 0 \\ I_{n-2} \end{bmatrix},$$

where

$$A = \begin{bmatrix} \cos 2\pi/m & -\sin 2\pi/m \\ \sin 2\pi/m & \cos 2\pi/m \end{bmatrix}.$$

Thus the trace of $

If $m > 6$, then

$$2 > 2 \cos 2\pi/m > 2 \cos 2\pi/6 = 1,$$

and so $2 \cos 2\pi/m$ is not an integer.

As a result of Proposition 5.2.1 the only irreducible Coxeter groups that might be crystallographic are those having the Coxeter graphs $A_n, B_n, D_n, G_2, F_4, E_6, E_7$, and $E_8$ (provided such groups exist). Assuming their existence, which will be established in Section 5.3, let us show that these groups are in fact all crystallographic.

Suppose then that $\mathcal{G}$ is an irreducible Coxeter group and that $p_{ij} \in \{1, 2, 3, 4, 6\}$ for all $i$ and $j$. Assign relative lengths to the roots $r_1, \ldots, r_n$ as follows:

If $p_{ij} = 3$, then $\|r_i\| = \|r_j\|$.

If $p_{ij} = 4$, then $\|r_i\| = \sqrt{2}\|r_j\|$ or $\|r_j\| = \sqrt{2}\|r_i\|$.

If $p_{ij} = 6$, then $\|r_i\| = \sqrt{3}\|r_j\|$ or $\|r_j\| = \sqrt{3}\|r_i\|$.

It is easy to see by inspection of the Coxeter graphs that it is always possible to assign lengths consistently that satisfy these requirements. All simple roots must be taken to have equal lengths in the cases $A_n, D_n, E_6, E_7$, and $E_8$. For $B_n$ we may take

$$\sqrt{2}\|r_1\| = \|r_2\| = \cdots = \|r_n\|,$$

for $G_2$ take $\sqrt{3}\|r_1\| = \|r_2\|$, and for $F_4$ take

$$\|r_1\| = \|r_2

Suppose $p_{ij} = 4$, so that

$$\left(r_i, r_j\right) = -\left(\sqrt{2}/2\right)\left\|r_i\right\| \left\|r_j\right\|.$$

If $\left\|r_i\right\| = \sqrt{2}\left\|r_j\right\|$, then $(r_i, r_j) = -\left\|r_j\right\|^2$ and

$$S_i r_j = r_j - 2 \frac{\left(-\left\|r_j\right\|^2\right)}{2\left\|r_j\right\|^2} r_i = r_j + r_i \in \mathcal{L}.$$

If $\left\|r_j\right\| = \sqrt{2}\left\|r_i\right\|$, then $(r_i, r_j) = -\left\|r_i\right\|^2$ and

$$S_i r_j = r_j + 2 r_i \in \mathcal{L}.$$

A similar analysis shows that if $p_{ij} = 6$, then $S_i r_j$ must be either $r_j + r_i$ or $r_j + 3r_i$, so $S_i r_j \in \mathcal{L}$. Of course, if $p_{ij} = 1$, then $S_i r_j = -r_j$; and if $p_{ij} = 2$, then $S_i r_j = r_j$. It follows that $S_i \mathcal{L} = \mathcal{L}$ for every fundamental reflection $S_i$, and hence that $T \mathcal{L} = \mathcal{L}$ for all $T \in \mathcal{G}$, by Theorem 4.1.12. Thus $\mathcal{G}$ is crystallographic.

For reducible Coxeter groups $\mathcal{G}$ see Exercise 5.3.

### 5.3 CONSTRUCTION OF IRREDUCIBLE COXETER GROUPS

Two different methods will be used to establish the existence of the various irreducible Coxeter groups. The first method, which will be applied to the groups with graphs $A_n, B_n$, and $D_n$, involves finding a group "in nature," so to speak

Since $\{e_j : j \neq i, j \neq i + 1\} \cup \{e_i + e_{i+1}\}$ spans the hyperplane $W = (e_{i+1} - e_i)^\perp$, we see that each $S_i$ is a reflection and that $r_i = e_{i+1} - e_i$ may be taken as a root of $S_i$. Thus $S_{n+1}$, as a group of transformations, is generated by the reflections $S_1, \ldots, S_n$ along roots $r_1, \ldots, r_n$. In particular, $S_{n+1} \leq \mathcal{O}(\mathcal{R}^{n+1})$.

To obtain the root system $\Delta$ of $S_{n+1}$ we must find the roots of all conjugates in $S_{n+1}$ of the generating reflections $S_i$. But in a symmetric group the set of conjugates of any transposition is the set of all transpositions. Thus the set of conjugate reflections is the set of transpositions $(e_i e_j), i \neq j$, and the root system is

$$\Delta = \{e_i - e_j : i \neq j, 1 \leq i, j \leq n + 1\}.$$

Let us denote by $V$ the subspace of $\mathcal{R}^{n+1}$ spanned by the roots $r_1, \ldots, r_n$ of $S_{n+1}$, and by $A_n$ the group of restrictions to $V$ of the transformations in $S_{n+1}$. ($A_n$ is not the alternating group.) We continue to denote the generating reflections by $S_1, \ldots, S_n$. Then $A_n$ is effective, and hence is a Coxeter group. Since $A_n$ is isomorphic with $S_{n+1}$, we have $|A_n| = (n + 1)!$.

Observe that if $x = (\lambda_1, \ldots, \lambda_{n+1}) \in \mathcal{R}^{n+1}$, then $x \in V^\perp$ if and only if $\

Classification of Coxeter Groups

$\mathcal{A}_n$ above, we denote the generating reflections of $\mathcal{S}_n$ by $S_2, S_3, \ldots, S_n$, with respective roots $r_2 = e_2 - e_1, \ldots, r_n = e_n - e_{n-1}$. The second subgroup $\mathcal{K}_n$ is generated by the $n$ reflections $S_{e_1}, \ldots, S_{e_n}$ along the basis vectors $e_1, \ldots, e_n$. The effect of $S_{e_i}$ on any $x \in \mathbb{R}^n$ is simply to replace the $i$th entry of $x$ by its negative. Since the reflections $S_{e_i}$ all commute with one another, $\mathcal{K}_n$ is abelian and is the direct product of the two-element subgroups $\{1, S_{e_i}\}, 1 \leq i \leq n$. Thus $|\mathcal{K}_n| = 2^n$.

For each subset $J$ of $\{e_1, \ldots, e_n\}$, define $f_J : \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}^n$ by setting

$$f_J(e_i) = \begin{cases} -e_i & \text{if } e_i \in J, \\ e_i & \text{if } e_i \notin J. \end{cases}$$

Clearly, $f_J$ is the product of all $S_{e_i}$ for which $e_i \in J$, with $f_J = 1$ if $J = \emptyset$, and $\mathcal{K}_n$ consists of all such transformations $f_J$. The symmetric difference $J \dotplus L$ of two sets $J$ and $L$ is defined by

$$J \dotplus L = (J \cup L) \setminus (J \cap L).$$

It is easy to check that if $f_J, f_L \in \mathcal{K}_n$, then $f_J f_L = f_J \dotplus L$.

Let us investigate how the subgroups $\mathcal{S}_n$ and $\mathcal{K}_n$ interact. Supp

Readers having some familiarity with group extensions will recognize that $\mathcal{B}_n$ is a semidirect product, or split extension, of $\mathcal{K}_n$ by $\mathcal{S}_n$.

If we set $f_i = f_{\{e_i\}} = S_{e_i}$, $1 \leq i \leq n$, then $\mathcal{B}_n$ is generated by the set of reflections

$$\{f_1, \ldots, f_n, S_2, \ldots, S_n\}.$$

Among the roots of $\mathcal{B}_n$ are those of $\mathcal{S}_n$. In particular, $e_i - e_1$ is a root if $2 \leq i \leq n$. Let $T_i$ denote, momentarily, the reflection with root $e_i - e_1$, and observe that

$$T_i f_1 T_i^{-1} = f_{T_i \{e_i\}} = f_{\{e_i\}} = f_i.$$

Consequently, $\{f_1, S_2, \ldots, S_n\}$ is a generating set of reflections for $\mathcal{B}_n$. Set $S_1 = f_1$ and set $r_1 = e_1$, a root of $S_1$. Since $\{r_1, \ldots, r_n\}$ is a basis for $\mathcal{R}^n$, $\mathcal{B}_n$ is a Coxeter group.

Since the effect of each transformation in $\mathcal{B}_n$ on the basis vectors $e_1, \ldots, e_n$ is a permutation, followed by some sign changes, the root system $\Delta$ of $\mathcal{B}_n$ is

$$\Delta = \{ \pm e_i : 1 \leq i \leq n \} \cup \{ e_i \pm e_j : i \neq j, 1 \leq i, j \leq n \}.$$

Easy computations show that

$$e_i = \Sigma_{k=1}^{i} r_k,$$

$$e_i - e_j = \Sigma_{k=1}^{i-1} r_{k+1} \quad \text{if } i > j,$$

$$e_i + e

Since any even number of sign changes can be made by successively changing signs two at a time, $L_n$ is generated by the products $S_{e_i} S_{e_j}$, $i \neq j$. Among the transformations in $D_n$ are the reflections $S_{e_i + e_j}$, $i \neq j$. Given $i \neq j$ choose $T \in S_n$ such that $Te_1 = e_i$ and $Te_2 = e_j$. Then by Proposition 4.1.1 we have

$$TS_{e_1 + e_2} T^{-1} = S_{e_i + e_j}.$$

Also, if $i \neq j$, then $S_{e_i - e_j} \in S_n$, and it is easy to check that

$$S_{e_i - e_j} S_{e_i + e_j} = S_{e_i} S_{e_j}.$$

It follows that $\{S_1, S_2, \ldots, S_n\}$ is a generating set of reflections for $D_n$.

Applying all permutations of $\{e_i\}$ to the roots $\{r_1, \ldots, r_n\}$, followed by even numbers of sign changes, we obtain the root system

$$\Delta = \{e_i \pm e_j : i \neq j, 1 \leq i, j \leq n\}.$$

Since

$$e_i - e_j = \Sigma_{k=j}^{i-1} r_{k+1} \quad \text{if } i > j,$$

$$e_i + e_1 = r_1 + \Sigma_{k=3}^{i} r_k \quad \text{if } i \neq 1,$$

$$e_i + e_2 = \Sigma_{k=1}^{i} r_k \quad \text{if } i > 2,$$

and

$$e_i + e_j = r_1 + r_2 + 2 \Sigma_{k=3}^{j} r_k + \Sigma_{k=j}^{i-1} r_{k+1} \quad \text{if } 2 < j < i,$$

we see that $\{

If the base vectors $r_1, r_2$, and $r_3$ of $\mathcal{B}_3$ are relabeled as

$$r_2 = e_1, \quad r_3 = e_2 - e_1, \quad r_4 = e_3 - e_2$$

and viewed as vectors in $\mathcal{R}^4$, then we wish to add a vector $r_1$ so that $\{r_1, r_2, r_3, r_4\}$ has Coxeter graph $F_4$. The requirements for $r_1 = (\lambda_1, \lambda_2, \lambda_3, \lambda_4)$, including the crystallographic condition, are

$$\|r_1\|^2 = \|r_2\|^2 = \Sigma_{i=1}^4 \lambda_i^2 = 1,$$

$$(r_1, r_2) = \lambda_1 = -1/2,$$

$$(r_1, r_3) = \lambda_2 - \lambda_1 = 0,$$

$$(r_1, r_4) = \lambda_3 - \lambda_2 = 0.$$

Thus $r_1 = (-1/2, -1/2, -1/2, \lambda_4)$, with $\lambda_4^2 = 1/4$. We choose $\lambda_4 = -1/2$, or

$$r_1 = -(1/2) \Sigma_{i=1}^4 e_i,$$

and the resulting graph is $F_4$.

For $G_2$ it is convenient to choose a base in $\mathcal{R}^3$, extending the one basic vector $r_1 = e_2 - e_1$ of $\mathcal{A}_1$. Of course, $r_2$ could be chosen in $\mathcal{R}^2$, but it is possible to find $r_2 \in \mathcal{R}^3$ with integer coordinates such that $\{r_1, r_2\}$ has graph $G_2$. The requirements for $r_2 = (\lambda_1, \lambda_2, \lambda_3)$ are

$$\lambda_1^2 + \lambda_2^2

$r_1, r_2,$ and $r_3$ as vectors in $\mathcal{R}^4$ and extend to a base with graph $I_4$ by adjoining the vector $r_4 = \beta(-2\alpha, 0, -2\alpha - 1, 1)$.

One more extension is required. If the base vectors of $\mathcal{A}_7$ are again relabeled as

$$r_i = e_i - e_{i-1}, \quad 2 \leq i \leq 8,$$

we may adjoin

$$r_1 = (1/2)(\Sigma_{i=1}^3 e_i - \Sigma_{i=4}^8 e_i);$$

then $\{r_1, r_2, \ldots, r_8\}$ has graph $E_8$, since

$$(r_1, r_4)/\|r_1\| \|r_4\| = -1/2,$$

$$(r_1, r_i) = 0 \quad \text{if } i \neq 1, i \neq 4.$$

Clearly, the subsets $\{r_1, \ldots, r_6\}$ and $\{r_1, \ldots, r_7\}$ have graphs $E_6$ and $E_7$.

The bases for all the graphs in Figure 5.3 are tabulated in Table 5.1 for easy reference.

For each graph $G$ from $G_2$ to $E_8$ in Table 5.1, let $V$ be the space spanned by the set of vectors $\Gamma = \{r_1, \ldots, r_n\}$. In each case $\Gamma$ is a linearly independent set so it is a basis for $V$. Thus there is a vector $t \in V$ such that $(t, r_i) > 0, 1 \leq i \leq n$ (see Exercise 5.4). Let $S_i$ be the reflection in $\mathcal{O}(V)$ along $r_i, 1 \leq i \leq n$, and let

$$\mathcal{G} = \langle S_1, \ldots, S_n \rangle \leq \mathcal{

The following algorithm can be used to obtain the root system $\Delta$ of $\mathcal{G}$. Set $\Gamma_0 = \Gamma = \{r_1, \ldots, r_n\}$. For each $r_i \in \Gamma_0$ with $(r_1, r_i) < 0$, apply $S_1$ to $r_i$ to obtain the root $S_1r_i$. The same procedure is applied in turn with $S_1$ and $r_1$ replaced by $S_2$ and $r_2$, then by $S_3$ and $r_3, \ldots, S_n$ and $r_n$. Denote the set of roots obtained, including $\Gamma_0$, by $\Gamma_1$. The process is then repeated, with $S_i$ applied to each $r \in \Gamma_1 \setminus \Gamma_0$ for which $(r_i, r) < 0$, $1 \leq i \leq n$, and the resulting set of roots is denoted by $\Gamma_2$. Continuing, we obtain

$$\Gamma_0 \subseteq \Gamma_1 \subseteq \Gamma_2 \subseteq \Gamma_3 \subseteq \cdots.$$

Since $S_i$ is applied to $r \in \Gamma_j$ only if $(r_i, r) < 0$, and since

$$S_i r = r - 2 \frac{(r_i, r)}{(r_i, r_i)} r_i,$$

we see inductively that every root obtained by this process is a non-negative linear combination of $\{r_1, \ldots, r_n\}$.

When the algorithm is applied to the bases in Table 5.1, we find that in each case the procedure terminates in a finite number of steps, in the sense that for some $k$ we have $(r_i, r) \geq 0$ for all $r \in \Gamma_k \setminus \Gamma_{k-1}$, $1 \leq i \leq n$. We then adjoin the negatives of all roots obtained, setting $\Gamma^* = \Gamma_k \cup -\Gamma_k$.

The next step is to verify that $S_i \Gamma^* = \Gamma^*

At the next stage

$$\begin{align*}
(r_1, r_1 + r_2) &= 2 - 3 < 0, \\
(r_1, 3r_1 + r_2) &= 6 - 3 > 0, \\
(r_2, r_1 + r_2) &= -3 + 6 > 0, \\
(r_2, 3r_1 + r_2) &= -9 + 6 < 0,
\end{align*}$$

and we obtain

$$S_1(r_1 + r_2) = -r_1 + (3r_1 + r_2) = 2r_1 + r_2,$$
$$S_2(3r_1 + r_2) = 3(r_1 + r_2) - r_2 = 3r_1 + 2r_2,$$
$$\Gamma_2 \setminus \Gamma_1 = \{2r_1 + r_2, 3r_1 + 2r_2\}$$
$$= \{e_3 - e_1, -e_1 - e_2 + 2e_3\}.$$

The procedure terminates at this stage, since

$$\begin{align*}
(r_1, 2r_1 + r_2) &= 4 - 3 > 0, \\
(r_1, 3r_1 + 2r_2) &= 6 - 6 = 0, \\
(r_2, 2r_1 + r_2) &= -6 + 6 = 0, \\
(r_2, 3r_1 + 2r_2) &= -9 + 12 > 0.
\end{align*}$$

Thus $\Gamma^* = \Gamma_2 \cup -\Gamma_2$.

In order to verify that $S_i\Gamma^* = \Gamma^*$ it suffices to check that $S_i\Gamma_2 \subseteq \Gamma^*$; if $r \in \Gamma_2$, we know already that $S_i r \in \Gamma_2$ if $(r_i, r) < 0$. Of course, $S_i r = r$ if

is a root, changing the first, second, fourth and fifth signs in $r_1$. Continuing, we obtain as roots all vectors that result from permuting the entries of $r_1$. In particular, we obtain

$$r = (1/2)(-1, -1, -1, 1, 1, 1, -1, -1),$$

and $(r, r_1) = -1$, so

$$S_1r = r + r_1 = -e_7 - e_8$$

is a root.

If $i \leq 6$, then $(r_{7i}, -e_7 - e_8) = -1$, and we obtain

$$S_{7i}S_1r = (-e_7 - e_8) + (e_7 - e_i) = -e_i - e_8.$$

Then if $j \neq i, j \neq 8$, we also have $(r_{8j}, -e_i - e_8) = -1$, and we obtain all $-e_i - e_j, i \neq j$.

Observe next, for example, that $(r_1, -e_2 - e_3) = -1$, so that $r_1 - e_2 - e_3 = (1/2)(1, -1, -1, -1, -1, -1, -1)$ is a root. Similarly, we obtain all vectors $(1/2)\Sigma_1^8 \varepsilon_i e_i$, where one $\varepsilon_i$ is 1 and the others are $-1$.

All the roots of $\mathcal{E}_8$ obtained thus far are nonnegative linear combinations of $\{r_1, r_2, \ldots, r_8\}$ (having, in fact, integer coefficients). Adjoining their negatives we have the following set $\Gamma^*$ of 240 roots:

all $\pm e_i \pm e_j$, $i \neq j$, $1 \leq i, j \leq 8,$

all $(1/2)\Sigma_1^8 \varepsilon_i e_i$, $\varepsilon_i = \pm 1$, $\Pi_{i=1}^8 \varepsilon_i = -1.$

if $i \leq 3$ or $j \geq 4$; and that

$$S_1(e_i - e_j) = e_i - e_j + r_1$$

is a 1/2-vector with three minus signs if $j \leq 3 < i$.

It remains to check the effects of all $S_i$ on the 1/2-vectors $(1/2) \Sigma \varepsilon_i e_i$. If $i \neq 1$ and $r$ is a 1/2-vector, then either $S_i r = r$ or else $S_i r$ is another 1/2-vector with two sign changes. If we write

$$r_1 = (1/2) \Sigma v_i e_i, \quad r = (1/2) \Sigma \varepsilon_i e_i,$$

then $(r_1, r) = (1/4) \Sigma v_i \varepsilon_i$ and

$$\Pi_1^8(v_i \varepsilon_i) = (\Pi v_i)(\Pi \varepsilon_i) = (-1)^2 = 1;$$

so $v_i \varepsilon_i = -1$ for an even number of indices $i$. Assuming that $r \neq \pm r_1$, the number is two, four, or six. If it is four, then $(r_1, r) = 0$ and $S_1 r = r$. If it is two, then $(r_1, r) = 1$ and $S_1 r = r - r_1$. But then $r_1$ and $r$ agree except at two entries, so $r - r_1$ is $\pm e_i \pm e_j$ for some $i$ and $j$. Similarly, if $v_i \varepsilon_i = -1$ for six values of $i$, then $S_1 r = r + r_1$, and again $S_1 r$ is $\pm e_i \pm e_j$ for some $i$ and $j$.

Thus $\Gamma^* = \Delta$, and we may conclude as in the earlier cases that $\mathcal{E}_8$ is a Coxeter group with Coxeter graph $E_8$.

If we

circumstances that fact can be used in the construction of $I_4$ (see [37], p. 308). A thorough discussion of finite groups of unit quaternions is given in [15].

We may now describe all finite subgroups of $\mathcal{O}(V)$ that are generated by reflections. We summarize in a theorem.

**Theorem 5.3.1**

If $\mathcal{G}$ is a finite subgroup of $\mathcal{O}(V)$ that is generated by reflections, then $V$ may be written as the orthogonal direct sum of $\mathcal{G}$-invariant subspaces $V_0, V_1, \ldots, V_k$, with the following properties:

(a) If $\mathcal{G}_i = \{T | V_i : T \in \mathcal{G}\}$, then $\mathcal{G}_i \leq \mathcal{O}(V_i)$ and $\mathcal{G}$ is isomorphic with $\mathcal{G}_0 \times \mathcal{G}_1 \times \cdots \times \mathcal{G}_k$.

(b) $\mathcal{G}_0$ consists only of the identity transformation on $V_0$.

(c) Each $\mathcal{G}_i, i \geq 1$, is one of the groups

$$\mathcal{A}_n, n \geq 1; \mathcal{B}_n, n \geq 2; \mathcal{D}_n, n \geq 4; \mathcal{H}_2^n, n \geq 5, n \neq 6;$$

$$\mathcal{G}_2; \mathcal{I}_3; \mathcal{I}_4; \mathcal{F}_4; \mathcal{E}_6; \mathcal{E}_7; \text{or } \mathcal{E}_8.$$

The group $\mathcal{G}$ is a Coxeter group if and only if $V_0 = 0$, and $\mathcal{G}$ is crystallographic if and only if $\mathcal{H}_2^n, \mathcal{I}_3$, and $\mathcal{I}_4$ do not appear among the direct factors $\mathcal{G}_i$.<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>

J.4 ORDERS OF IRREDUCIBLE COXETER GROUPS

The orders of the groups $A_n, B_n$, and $D_n$ were computed in Section 5.3, and it was observed in Chapter 2 that the order of $H_2^n$ is $2n$. Since $G_2$ is just the dihedral group $H_2^6$, it has order 12. The computation of the orders of the remaining irreducible Coxeter groups is less straightforward and requires some preparation.

We continue to assume that $G$ is a Coxeter group (possibly reducible). As in Chapter 4 we shall denote by $\{s_1, \ldots, s_n\}$ the basis dual to $\Pi = \{r_1, \ldots, r_n\}$. The open half-space containing $r_i$ determined by the hyperplane $P_i = r_i^\perp$ will be denoted by $L_i$; i.e.,

$$L_i = \{x \in V : (x, r_i) > 0\}.$$

Theorem 5.4.1 (Witt, [37], p. 294)

If $H$ is the subgroup of $G$ leaving $s_i$ fixed, then

$$H = \langle S_1, \ldots, S_{i-1}, S_{i+1}, \ldots, S_n \rangle.$$

Proof

There is no loss of generality in assuming that $i = n$. Set $K = \langle S_1, \ldots, S_{n-1} \rangle$. Then clearly $K \leq H$, since $s_n \perp r_i$, $1 \leq i \leq n-1$, and so $S_i s_n = s_n$. Let $X_1$ be the $(n-1)$ sphere of radius $\|s_n\|$ centered at the origin; i.e.,

$$X_1 = \{x \in V : \|x\| = \|s_n\|\}.$$

Let $X_2$ be an $(n-1)$ sphere of radius $d$ centered at $s_n$, where $d$ is sufficiently small so that $X_2

and $T \in \mathcal{H}$, satisfying $Ty = x$. But that is impossible, since $x$ and $y$ are distinct points in the fundamental region $F(\mathcal{G})$. Thus $F_X(\mathcal{H}) = F_X(\mathcal{K})$, from which it follows that $|\mathcal{H}| = |\mathcal{K}|$, and hence that $\mathcal{H} = \mathcal{K}$, as desired.

Proposition 5.4.2

Suppose that $\mathcal{G}$ is irreducible and that its Coxeter graph $G$ has no marks over its branches. Then $\mathcal{G}$ is transitive as a permutation group on its root system $\Delta$.

Proof

Since $\Delta = \{Tr_i : T \in \mathcal{G}, r_i \in \Pi\}$, it will suffice to prove that if $r_i, r_j \in \Pi$, then $Tr_i = r_j$ for some $T \in \mathcal{G}$. Suppose that $r_i$ and $r_j$ correspond to nodes of $G$ that are adjacent, i.e., joined by a branch. Then $(r_i, r_j) / \|r_i\| \|r_j\| = -1/2$, and

$$S_i S_j r_i = S_i(r_i + r_j) = -r_i + (r_j + r_i) = r_j.$$

Since roots corresponding to adjacent nodes are $\mathcal{G}$-equivalent, and since $G$ is connected, by Proposition 5.1.4, it follows that any two roots in $\Pi$ are $\mathcal{G}$-equivalent, and the proof is complete.

The proof of Proposition 5.4.2 will also show that $\mathcal{I}_3$ and $\mathcal{I}_4$ are transitive on their root systems if we can show that the roots $r_1, r_2 \in \Pi$, with $(r_1, r_2) = -\cos \pi/5$, can be interchanged by elements of $\mathcal{I}_3$ and $\mathcal{I}_4$, respectively. It can be checked directly that $(S_1 S_2)^2 r_1 = r_2$. It is perhaps simpler and more illumin

Thus the stabilizer Stab(r) is the subgroup of $\mathcal{G}$ generated by all fundamental reflections except $S_i$, by Witt’s theorem. In each case $|Stab(r)|$ and $|Orb(r)|$ will be known, so an application of Proposition 1.2.1 completes the computation of $|\mathcal{G}|$.

Let us illustrate with the case of $\mathcal{F}_4$. The root $r = e_4 - e_3$ is orthogonal to $r_1, r_2$, and $r_3$ (see Table 5.1), so $r = \lambda s_4$ for some scalar $\lambda$, and $Stab(r) = Stab(s_4) = \langle S_1, S_2, S_3 \rangle$ by Theorem 5.4.1. Since the graph of $\{r_1, r_2, r_3\}$ is just $B_3$, we see that $Stab(r) = \mathcal{B}_3$, and so $|Stab(r)| = 2^3 \cdot 3! = 48$. As we observed above each orbit of $\Delta$ has 24 roots, so by Proposition 1.2.1 we have

$$| \mathcal{F}_4 | = [\mathcal{F}_4 : Stab(r)] | Stab(r)|$$

$$= |Orb(r)| |\mathcal{B}_3| = 24 \cdot 48 = 1152.$$

The procedure is the same for all the remaining cases. The remaining groups are transitive on their root systems, by Proposition 5.4.2 and the remarks following its proof, so Orb(r) is all of $\Delta$. In Table 5.3 are listed the group $\mathcal{G}$, the root $r = \lambda s_i$, the stabilizer of $r$ and its order, and the cardinality of Orb(r).

The order of each group in Table 5.3 is obtained by multiplying the numbers in the last two columns. In summary we tabulate all the irreducible Coxeter groups with their orders in Table 5.4.<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>

Finite Reflection Groups

$$\mathcal{G} \quad i \quad r = \lambda s_i \quad \text{Stab}(r) \quad |\text{Stab}(r)| \quad |\text{Orb}(r)|$$

$$\mathcal{I}_3 \quad 2 \quad \beta(1, 2\alpha, 2\alpha + 1) \quad \mathcal{A}_1 \times \mathcal{A}_1 \quad 4 \quad 30$$
$$\mathcal{I}_4 \quad 4 \quad e_4 \quad \mathcal{I}_3 \quad 120 \quad 120$$
$$\mathcal{F}_4 \quad 4 \quad e_4 - e_3 \quad \mathcal{B}_3 \quad 48 \quad 24$$
$$\mathcal{E}_6 \quad 1 \quad e_7 + e_8 \quad \mathcal{A}_5 \quad 6! \quad 72$$
$$\mathcal{E}_7 \quad 2 \quad e_1 + e_8 \quad \mathcal{D}_6 \quad 2^5 \cdot 6! \quad 126$$
$$\mathcal{E}_8 \quad 8 \quad (1/2)(\Sigma_1^7 e_i - e_8) \quad \mathcal{E}_7 \quad 2^5 \cdot 6! \cdot 126 \quad 240$$

Table 5.3

$$\mathcal{G} \quad |\mathcal{G}| \quad \mathcal{G} \quad |\mathcal{G}|$$

$$\mathcal{A}_n \quad (n + 1)! \quad \mathcal{I}_3 \quad 2^3 \cdot 3 \cdot 5$$
$$\mathcal{B}_n \quad 2^n \cdot n! \quad \mathcal{I}_4 \quad 2^6 \cdot 3^2 \cdot 5^2$$
$$\mathcal{D}_n \quad 2^{n-1} \cdot n! \quad \mathcal{E}_6 \quad 2^7 \cdot 3^4 \cdot 5$$

5.7 Using Theorem 5.3.1 we may write down all finite reflection groups in two and three dimensions, and these groups must appear among the groups listed in Theorems 2.2.1 and 2.5.2. Verify the following identifications:

$$\mathcal{A}_1 \times 1 = \mathcal{H}_2^1; \quad \mathcal{A}_1 \times \mathcal{A}_1 = \mathcal{H}_2^2; \quad \mathcal{A}_2 = \mathcal{H}_2^3; \quad \mathcal{B}_2 = \mathcal{H}_2^4;$$

$$\mathcal{G}_2 = \mathcal{H}_2^6; \quad \mathcal{A}_1 \times 1_2 = \mathcal{C}_3^2] \mathcal{C}_3^1; \quad \mathcal{A}_1 \times \mathcal{A}_1 \times 1 = \mathcal{H}_3^2] \mathcal{C}_3^2;$$

$$\mathcal{A}_2 \times 1 = \mathcal{H}_3^3] \mathcal{C}_3^3; \quad \mathcal{B}_2 \times 1 = \mathcal{H}_3^4] \mathcal{C}_3^4; \quad \mathcal{G}_2 \times 1 = \mathcal{H}_3^6] \mathcal{C}_3^6;$$

$$\mathcal{A}_1 \times \mathcal{A}_1 \times \mathcal{A}_1 = (\mathcal{H}_3^2)^*; \quad \mathcal{A}_1 \times \mathcal{A}_2 = \mathcal{H}_3^6] \mathcal{H}_3^3;$$

$$\mathcal{A}_1 \times \mathcal{B}_2 = (\mathcal{H}_3^4)^*; \quad \mathcal{A}_1 \times \mathcal{G}_2 = (\mathcal{H}_3^6)^*; \quad \mathcal{A}_3 = W] \mathcal{T};$$

$$\mathcal{B}_3 = W^*; \quad \mathcal{I}_3 = I^*; \quad \mathcal{A}_1 \times \mathcal{H

5.12 Construct the root systems of $\mathcal{I}_3, \mathcal{F}_4,$ and $\mathcal{I}_4$.

5.13 Let $Y$ be a sphere of radius $\alpha$ centered at $y \in V$ and $Z$ a sphere of radius $\beta$ centered at $z \in V,$ and set $d = d(z, y).$ Show that the $(n - 2)$ sphere $X = Y \cap Z$ has radius

$$\gamma = \frac{[2(\alpha^2\beta^2 + (\alpha^2 + \beta^2)d^2) - (\alpha^4 + \beta^4 + d^4)]^{1/2}}{2d^2}$$

and center

$$x = \left( \frac{d^2 - \alpha^2 + \beta^2}{2d^2} \right) y + \left( \frac{d^2 + \alpha^2 - \beta^2}{2d^2} \right) z,$$

assuming that $X \neq \emptyset$.

5.14 Identify $x = (\lambda_1, \lambda_2, \lambda_3, \lambda_4) \in \mathcal{R}^4$ with the real quaternion $x = \lambda_1 + \lambda_2 i + \lambda_3 j + \lambda_4 k \in Q$ (see [23], pp. 87 and 328–329).

(a) Show that the inner product in $\mathcal{R}^4$ can be expressed in terms of addition, multiplication, and the adjoint operation in $Q$ by means of the formula

$$(x, y) = (1/2)(xy^* + yx^*).$$

(b) If $r \in \mathcal{R}^4$ is a unit vector, show that $S_r x = -rx^* r$ for all $x \in \mathcal{R}^4$.

5.15 Suppose that $\mathcal{K}$ is a finite subgroup of the multiplicative group of nonzero quaternions.

(a) Show that $\|x\| = 1$ for all $x \in \mathcal{K}$.

(b) If $x \in \mathcal{K},

GENERATORS AND RELATIONS FOR COXETER GROUPS

In this chapter we assume that the reader is familiar with the elementary theory of free groups (see [20], pp. 91–94, for example). Readers familiar with generators and relations may wish to proceed immediately to page 85.

If $G$ is an arbitrary group generated by a subset $S$, then there is a homomorphism $\varphi$ from a free group $F$ of rank $|S|$ onto $G$, and so $G$ is isomorphic with the quotient group $F/H$, where $H$ is the kernel of $\varphi$. In fact, $F$ may be chosen to be the free group based on the set $S$ itself. If an element $T$ of $S$ is denoted by $\hat{T}$ when it is considered as an element of the free group $F$ rather than as an element of $G$, then the homomorphism is the map that results from setting $\varphi(\hat{T}) = T$ for all $\hat{T} \in S$.

If $T \in G$, then $T$ can be written as a product

$$T = T_1^{\varepsilon_1} T_2^{\varepsilon_2} \cdots T_k^{\varepsilon_k},$$

where each $T_i \in S$ and each $\varepsilon_i$ is either $+1$ or $-1$. When we wish to call attention to the particular product of generators we shall say that $T$ is represented by the word

$$W = T_1^{\varepsilon_1} \cdots T_k^{\varepsilon_k}.$$

The corresponding element of the free group $F$ is the word $\hat{W} = \hat{T}^{\varepsilon_1} \cdots \hat{T}_k^{\varepsilon_k}$ and two words $\hat{W}_1$ and $\hat{W}_2$ representing elements of $G$ will be considered the same if and only if the corresponding $\hat{W}_1$ and $\hat{W}_2$ are equal in $F$. To allay any possible confusion it should perhaps be emphasized that $W \rightarrow \hat{W}$ is not a homomorphism.<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>

Suppose that $\{R_\alpha : \alpha \in A\}$, where $A$ is some index set, is a collection of words in $\mathcal{G}$ with the property that each $\hat{R}_\alpha \in \mathcal{H} = \ker \varphi$, and $\mathcal{H}$ is the smallest normal subgroup of $\mathcal{F}$ containing all $\hat{R}_\alpha$. Then each element of $\mathcal{H}$ is a product of conjugates (in $\mathcal{F}$) of the words $\hat{R}_\alpha$ and their inverses. In this situation it is said that $\mathcal{G}$ has the presentation

$$\langle T \in \mathcal{S} | R_\alpha = 1, \alpha \in A \rangle,$$

or that $\mathcal{G}$ has generators $\mathcal{S}$ and relations $R_\alpha$, $\alpha \in A$. For example, $\mathcal{H}_2^n$ has the presentation

$$\langle S_1, S_2 | S_1^2 = 1, S_2^2 = 1, (S_1 S_2)^n = 1 \rangle.$$

If certain relations $U_\beta = 1$, $\beta \in B$, where each $U_\beta$ is a word in the generators $T \in \mathcal{S}$, hold in $\mathcal{G}$, then another relation $T_1 T_2 \cdots T_k = 1$ in $\mathcal{G}$ is called a consequence of the relations $U_\beta = 1$ if and only if the word $\hat{T}_1 \cdots \hat{T}_k$ is a product of conjugates of the words $\hat{U}_\beta$ and their inverses in the free group $\mathcal{F}$. Thus if every relation $T_1 \cdots T_k = 1$ in $\mathcal{G}$ is a consequence of the relations $U_\beta = 1$, it is clear that $\mathcal{G}$ has a presentation

$$\langle T \in \mathcal{S} | U_\beta = 1, \beta \in B \rangle.$$

We wish to show that if a relation $W = 1$ may be reduced to the relation $1 = 1$ by

and hence

$$\hat{W}_1 = \hat{W}_3(\hat{X}_2^{-1}\hat{U}_2\hat{X}_2)(\hat{X}_1^{-1}\hat{U}_1\hat{X}_1).$$

Continuing, we obtain

$$\hat{W}_i = \hat{W}_{i+1}(\hat{X}_i^{-1}\hat{U}_i\hat{X}_i),$$

and so

$$\hat{W}_1 = \hat{W}_{i+1}(\hat{X}_i^{-1}\hat{U}_i\hat{X}_i) \cdots (\hat{X}_1^{-1}\hat{U}_1\hat{X}_1),$$

$i = 1, 2, 3, \ldots$. By hypothesis some $W_{u+1}$ is just the identity element 1 of $\mathcal{G}$, so that $W_{u+1}$ is the empty word in $\mathcal{F}$; so

$$\hat{W}_1 = (\hat{X}_u^{-1}\hat{U}_u\hat{X}_u) \cdots (\hat{X}_1^{-1}\hat{U}_1\hat{X}_1),$$

proving our contention.

Thus in order to show that $\mathcal{G}$ has a presentation $\langle T \in \mathcal{S} | U_\beta = 1, \beta \in B \rangle$, it is sufficient to show that every relation $W = 1$ in $\mathcal{G}$ may be reduced to the relation $1 = 1$ by successive applications of the relations $U_\beta = 1$.

Suppose now until further notice that $\mathcal{G}$ is a Coxeter group in $\mathcal{O}(V)$, with base $\Pi = \{r_1, \ldots, r_n\}$. Then $\mathcal{G}$ is generated by the set $\{S_1, \ldots, S_n\}$ of fundamental reflections. By Proposition 5.1.1 there are positive integers $p_{ij}$ such that $(S_i S_j)^{p_{ij}} = 1$ for each pair $i$ and $j$ of subscripts.

Proof

For each $R \in \mathcal{G}$ denote by $n(R)$ the number of positive roots that are sent to negative roots by $R$; i.e., $n(R) = |R(\Delta^+) \cap \Delta^-|$. By Proposition 4.1.9, $S_i(\Delta^+ \setminus \{r_i\}) = \Delta^+ \setminus \{r_i\}$, so

$$TS_i(\Delta^+ \setminus \{r_i\}) = T(\Delta^+ \setminus \{r_i\}).$$

Thus $TS_i$ and $T$ send the same number of positive roots different from $r_i$ to negative roots. If $Tr_i \in \Delta^+$, then $TS_i r_i = -Tr_i \in \Delta^-$, so $r_i$ is sent to a positive root by $T$ but to a negative root by $TS_i$. As a result, $n(TS_i) = n(T) + 1$. Similarly, if $Tr_i \in \Delta^-$, then $TS_i r_i \in \Delta^+$ and $n(TS_i) = n(T) - 1$. To complete the proof let us show that $n(T) = l(T)$.

It is an immediate consequence of what has just been proved that $n(R) \leq l(R)$ for all $R \in \mathcal{G}$, for if $l(R) = k$, then $R$ is a product of $k$ fundamental reflections. Explicitly, if $R = S_{i_1} \cdots S_{i_k}$, then

$$n(S_{i_1}) = 1,$$
$$n(S_{i_1} S_{i_2}) = n(S_{i_1}) \pm 1 \leq 2,$$
$$n(S_{i_1} S_{i_2} S_{i_3}) = n(S_{i_1} S_{i_2}) \pm 1 \leq 2 + 1 = 3,$$
$$\vdots$$
$$n(S_{i_1} \cdots S_{i_k}) = n(S_{i_1} \cdots S_{i_{k-1

Proposition 6.1.2
If $S_i$ and $S_j$ are fundamental reflections in $\mathcal{G}$ and $1 \leq m \leq p_{ij}$, then
$$\left( \cdots S_i S_j \right)_{m-1} r_i \in \Delta^+.$$

Proof
If $i = j$, then $p_{ij} = m = 1$ and the result is trivial. Assume then that $i \neq j$. If the proposition is false, choose the smallest $m$ for which
$$\left( \cdots S_i S_j \right)_{m-1} r_i \in \Delta^-.$$ Clearly $m > 1$. If $m$ is even then
$$\left( \cdots S_i S_j \right)_{m-1} r_i = \left( S_j \cdots S_i S_j \right)_{m-1} r_i$$
$$= S_j \left( \cdots S_i S_j \right)_{m-2} r_i \in \Delta^-,
$$
and $\left( \cdots S_i S_j \right)_{m-2} r_i \in \Delta^+$ by the minimality of $m$. Thus by Proposition 4.1.9 we have $\left( \cdots S_i S_j \right)_{m-2} r_i = r_j$. By Proposition 4.1.1,
$$S_j = \left( \cdots S_i S_j \right)_{m-2} S_i \left( \cdots S_i S_j \right)_{m-2}^{-1},$$
so
$$S_j \left( \cdots S_i S_j \right)_{m-2} = \left( \cdots S_i S_j \right)_{m-2} S_i,$$
or
$$\left( S_j \cdots S_i S_j \right)_{m-1} = \left( S_i \cdots S_j S_i \right)_{m-1}.$$
But then $(S_i S_j \cdots)_{2m-2} = (S_i S_j)^{m-1} = 1$, contradicting the fact that

by Proposition 6.1.1 and the induction hypothesis. Similarly, $l(T(\cdots S_i S_j)_m) = l(T) - m$.

If $W = S_{i_1} \cdots S_{i_k}$ is a word in $\mathcal{G}$, then each word $W_j = S_{i_1} \cdots S_{i_j}$, $0 \leq j \leq k$, will be called a partial word of $W$. If $j = 0$, then the word $W_j = W_0$ has no factors, and we agree as usual that $W_0 = 1$.

Theorem 6.1.4 (Coxeter [9])

Every relation $W = S_{i_1} \cdots S_{i_k} = 1$ in a Coxeter group $\mathcal{G}$ is a consequence of the relations $(S_i S_j)^{p_{ij}} = 1$, so $\mathcal{G}$ has the presentation

$$\langle S_1, \ldots, S_n | (S_i S_j)^{p_{ij}} = 1, 1 \leq i \leq j \leq n \rangle.$$

Proof

Suppose that $u$ is the maximal length of partial words of $W$. Then we may write $W$ as $W_1 S_i S_j W_2$, where $l(W_1 S_i) = u$ and every partial word of $W_1$ has length less than $u$. Set $p = p_{ij}$, let $W' = W_1(S_j S_i \cdots)_{2p-2} W_2$, and observe that $W$ and $W'$ are equal, as elements of $\mathcal{G}$. With the exception of $W_1 S_i$ all partial words of $W$ coincide, as group elements, with partial words of $W'$. In place of $W_1 S_i$, $W'$ has the partial words

$$W_1 S_j, W_1 S_j S_i, \ldots, W_1(S_j S_i \cdots)_{2p-3}.$$

Setting $T = W_1 S_i$ and using the relation $S_i^2 = 1$, we see

image under $T$ of a wall of $F$, and the image of the $i$th wall of $F$ will be called the $i$th wall of $TF$.

Each word $S_{i_1}S_{i_2} \cdots S_{i_k}$ may be associated with a path in $V$ in the following manner. First connect a point in $F$ to a point in $S_{i_1}F$ by a path (e.g., a line segment) through the $i_1$st wall of $F$. Next connect that point to a point in an adjacent fundamental region by a path through the $i_2$nd wall of $S_{i_1}F$. Note that the $i_2$nd wall of $S_{i_1}F$ is the intersection of $S_{i_1}F^-$ with the hyperplane $S_{i_1}(r_{i_2}^\perp)$, so the reflection that is actually applied at the second step to send $S_{i_1}F$ to the adjacent region is the reflection along $S_{i_1}r_{i_2}$, which, by Proposition 4.1.1, is $S_{i_1}S_{i_2}S_{i_1}^{-1}$. Thus the fundamental region reached at the second step is

$$(S_{i_1}S_{i_2}S_{i_1}^{-1})(S_{i_1}F) = S_{i_1}S_{i_2}F.$$

Next the point chosen in $S_{i_1}S_{i_2}F$ is connected to a point in an adjacent fundamental region by a path through the $i_3$rd wall of $S_{i_1}S_{i_2}F$. In this case the reflecting hyperplane is $S_{i_1}S_{i_2}(r_{i_3}^\perp)$, so the resulting fundamental region is

$$(S_{i_1}S_{i_2})S_{i_3}(S_{i_1}S_{i_2})^{-1}(S_{i_1}S_{i_2}F) = S_{i_1}S_{i_2}S

Suppose that $\mathcal{G} = \mathcal{A}_3 = W] \mathcal{T}$, the group of all symmetries of a tetrahedron. Then

$$S_i^2 = (S_1 S_2)^3 = (S_1 S_3)^2 = (S_2 S_3)^3 = 1.$$

The following relation holds in $\mathcal{G}$:

$$W = S_2 S_1 S_3 S_1 S_2 S_1 S_2 S_1 S_2 S_3 S_2 S_1 S_2 S_1 = 1.$$

The corresponding closed path on the surface of the tetrahedron is shown in Figure 6.1. It is clear from the Roman numerals in the figure that 5 is the maximal length for partial words of $W$, and that there is just one partial word of length 5, viz. $S_2 S_1 S_3 S_1 S_2 S_1 S_2$. As in the proof of Theorem 6.1.4 we write $W = W_1 S_2 S_1 W_2$ with $W_1 = S_2 S_1 S_3 S_1 S_2 S_1$ and $W_2 = S_2 S_3 S_2 S_1 S_2 S_1$. Applying the relation $(S_1 S_2)^3 = 1$, we replace $S_2 S_1$ by $S_1 S_2 S_1 S_2$, thereby replacing $W = 1$ by the relation

$$W^{(1)} = W_1 S_1 S_2 S_1 S_2 W_2$$

$$= S_2 S_1 S_3 S_1 S_2 S_1 S_1 S_2 S_1 S_2 S_3 S_2 S_1 S_2 S_1$$

The path corresponding to $W^{(1)}$ is shown in Figure 6.2(a).<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>

Figure 6.2<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>

The word $W^{(1)}$ has no partial words of length 5 or greater, but it has two partial words of length 4—$S_2S_1S_3S_1S_2S_1$ and $S_2S_1S_3S_1S_2S_1S_1S_2S_1S_2$. Repeating the procedure we apply $S_1^2 = 1$ and obtain the relation

$$W^{(2)} = S_2S_1S_3S_1S_2S_2S_1S_2S_2S_3S_2S_1S_2S_1 = 1.$$

The change from the path of $W^{(1)}$ to the path of $W^{(2)}$ is indicated by the dashed line in Figure 6.2(a).

The next partial word of length 4 is removed by applying the relation $S_2^2 = 1$, and we obtain the relation

$$W^{(3)} = S_2S_1S_3S_1S_2S_2S_1S_3S_2S_1S_2S_1 = 1.$$

The corresponding path is shown (undashed) in Figure 6.2(b).

Continuing, we obtain the relations

$$W^{(4)} = S_2S_1S_1S_3S_2S_2S_1S_3S_2S_1S_2S_1 = 1,$$

$$W^{(5)} = S_2S_1S_1S_3S_1S_3S_2S_1S_2S_1 = 1,$$

$$W^{(6)} = S_2S_1S_1S_3S_3S_1S_2S_1S_2S_1 = 1,$$

$$W^{(7)} = S_2S_1S_1S_3S_3S_1S_1S_2S_1S_2S_1 = 1,$$

$$W^{(8)} = S_2S_3S_3S_1S_1S_2S_1S_2S_2S_

where $v + w = 2p_{ij}$, if possible, or otherwise $v + w < 2p_{ij}$ and the first factor of $W_4$ is neither $S_i$ nor $S_j$. Let $W'$ be the word obtained from $W$ by applying $(S_i S_j)^{p_{ij}} = 1$ and replacing $(\cdots S_j S_i)_{v}(S_j S_i \cdots)_w$ by $(\cdots S_i S_j \cdots)_k$, where $k = 2p_{ij} - v - w$. Then $W'$ has one fewer partial words of length $u$ than $W$ (see Exercise 6.3).

To illustrate, suppose that $\mathcal{G} = \mathcal{B}_3 = \mathcal{W}^*$, so that $S_i^2 = (S_1 S_2)^4 = (S_1 S_3)^2 = (S_2 S_3)^3 = 1$. The following relation holds in $\mathcal{G}$:

$$W = S_2 S_3 S_1 S_2 S_1 S_3 S_1 S_2 S_3 S_2 S_1 S_3 S_2 S_1 S_2 S_1 S_2 S_1 S_2 S_3 S_1 S_2 = 1.$$

The corresponding path on the surface of the cube is shown in Figure 6.3(a). The maximal length of partial words of $W$ is 6, and there are two<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>

occurrences—$S_2S_3S_1S_2S_1S_3$ and $S_2S_3S_1S_2S_1S_3S_1S_2S_3S_2S_1S_3S_2S_1S_2S_1$. We write $W = W_3(S_1S_3)S_1W_4$, as indicated above, and apply $(S_1S_3)^2 = 1$, replacing $S_1S_3S_1$ by $S_3$, thereby replacing $W = 1$ by the relation

$$W^{(1)} = W_3S_3W_4 = 1.$$

The corresponding path is shown in Figure 6.3(b).

The word $W^{(1)}$ has $S_2S_3S_1S_2S_3S_2S_3S_2S_1S_3S_2S_1S_2S_1$ as its only partial word of length 6. We next apply $(S_1S_2)^4 = 1$, replacing $S_2S_1S_2S_1S_2S_1S_2$ by $S_1$, and obtain the relation

$$W^{(2)} = S_2S_3S_1S_2S_3S_2S_3S_2S_1S_3S_1S_3S_1S_2 = 1.$$

The path is shown in Figure 6.3(c).

The succeeding applications of the procedure and the drawing of the resulting paths are left as an exercise.

For the remainder of the chapter we shall suppose that $\mathcal{G}$ is a finite group having the presentation

$$\langle T_1, \ldots, T_n | (T_iT_j)^{p_{ij}} = 1, 1 \leq i, j \leq n \rangle,$$

where $p_{ii} = 1$ and $p_{ij} = p_{ji} \geq 2$ if $i \neq j$. We wish to establish the converse to Theorem 6.1.4, i.e., to show that $\mathcal{G}$

As a result, $G_1 \cap G_2 = 1$, and $G$ is in fact the (internal) direct product of its subgroups $G_1$ and $G_2$.

If $K_1$ and $K_2$ are groups having presentations

$$\langle S_1 | (T_i T_j)^{p_{ij}} = 1, 1 \leq i, j \leq k \rangle,$$

$$\langle S_2 | (T_i T_j)^{p_{ij}} = 1, k + 1 \leq i \leq n \rangle,$$

respectively, then $G_1$ and $G_2$ are homomorphic images of $K_1$ and $K_2$; so $|G_1| \leq |K_1|, |G_2| \leq |K_2|$. But the presentation given for $G$ is a presentation for $K_1 \times K_2$ (see Exercise 6.2), so

$$K_1 \times K_2 \cong G = G_1 \times G_2.$$

It follows that $|G_i| = |K_i|$, and so $G_i \cong K_i$, $i = 1, 2$.

Summing up, we have shown that if $G$ is decomposable, then it is a direct product of subgroups, each having a presentation of the same type that $G$ has. If either of the direct factors is decomposable, it is also a direct product. Ultimately, we see that $G$ is a direct product of indecomposable groups, each having a presentation of the same type that $G$ has. If each of the indecomposable direct factors $G_i$ of $G$ is isomorphic with a Coxeter group $H_i$, then $G$ is isomorphic with the Coxeter group that is the direct product of the Coxeter groups $H_i$. Consequently, it will be sufficient to show that indecomposable groups are isomorphic with Coxeter groups.

We assume for the remainder of the discussion that $G$ is indecomposable.

If $\{e_1, \ldots, e_n\}$ is the usual basis

Denote by $\mathcal{H}$ the group of nonsingular transformations of $\mathcal{R}^n$ generated by $\{S_1, \ldots, S_n\}$.

Proposition 6.1.5
There is a homomorphism $\psi$ from $\mathcal{G}$ onto $\mathcal{H}$ with $\psi(T_i) = S_i$, $1 \leq i \leq n$. In particular, $\mathcal{H}$ is a finite group.

Proof
We need only show that the generators $S_1, \ldots, S_n$ of $\mathcal{H}$ satisfy the relations in the presentation of $\mathcal{G}$ (see Exercise 6.1). Since $S_i e_i = -e_i$, we have for all $x \in \mathcal{R}^n$ that

$$S_i^2 x = S_i(x - 2(x, a_i)e_i) = S_i x - 2(x, a_i)S_i e_i$$
$$= x - 2(x, a_i)e_i + 2(x, a_i)e_i = x;$$

so $S_i^2 = 1$.

In order to show that $(S_i S_j)^{p_{ij}} = 1$ when $i \neq j$, we lose no generality by taking $i = 1$ and $j = 2$. Since $\alpha_{11} = \alpha_{22} = 1$ and $0 \leq \alpha_{ij} < 1$ if $i \neq j$, it is immediate that $a_1$ and $a_2$ are linearly independent in $\mathcal{R}^n$. Thus their orthogonal complements $\mathcal{P}_1$ and $\mathcal{P}_2$ are different from one another, and $\mathcal{P}_1 \cap \mathcal{P}_2$ has dimension $n - 2$. Choose $x_1, \ldots, x_n \in \mathcal{R}^n$ such that $\{x_1, x_3, x_4, \ldots, x_n\}$ is a basis for $\mathcal{P}_1$ and $\{x_2, x_3, \ldots, x_n\}$ is a basis for $\mathcal{P}_2$ (and hence $\

$x_3, \ldots, x_n$ the transformation $S_1 S_2$ is represented by the matrix

$$\begin{bmatrix}
4\alpha_{12}^2 - 1 & -2\alpha_{12} \\
-2\alpha_{12} & 0
\end{bmatrix} I_{n-2}$$

Easy computations show that the $2 \times 2$ matrix

$$B = \begin{bmatrix}
4\alpha_{12}^2 - 1 & -2\alpha_{12} \\
2\alpha_{12} & -1
\end{bmatrix}$$

has eigenvalues $e^{2\pi i/p_{12}}$ and $e^{-2\pi i/p_{12}}$. Since $p_{12} > 2$, the eigenvalues of $B$ are distinct and $B$ is similar (over the complex field) to the matrix

$$C = \begin{bmatrix}
e^{2\pi i/p_{12}} & 0 \\
0 & e^{-2\pi i/p_{12}}
\end{bmatrix}$$

Since $C^{p_{12}} = I$, we conclude that $B^{p_{12}} = I$, and hence that $(S_1 S_2)^{p_{12}} = 1$, proving the proposition.

The next proposition will be needed in Chapter 7, as well as for present purposes.

**Proposition 6.1.6**

If $\mathcal{H}$ is any finite group of invertible transformations of $V$ then there is an inner product $C$ on $V$ so that $\mathcal{H}$ is contained in the orthogonal group relative to $V$.

**Proof**

For each pair $x$ and $y$ of vectors in $V$ set $C(x, y) = \Sigma \{(Tx, Ty): T \in \mathcal{H}\}$. It is immediate that $C$ is a symmetric bilinear form on $V$. The associated quadratic form $Q$ is positive definite since

$$Q(x) = C(x, x) = \Sigma Tx^2 > 0 \quad \text{if } x \neq 0,$$

so $C$ is an inner product

Proof
Suppose that $W \neq \mathbb{R}^n$, $W \neq 0$, and set
$$W' = \{x \in \mathbb{R}^n : C(x, y) = 0 \text{ for all } y \in W\}.$$
Then $W'$ is the orthogonal complement of $W$ with respect to the inner product $C$, so $\mathbb{R}^n = W \oplus W'$. If $T \in \mathcal{H}$ and $x \in W'$, then
$$C(Tx, y) = C(T^{-1}Tx, T^{-1}y) = C(x, T^{-1}y) = 0$$
if $y \in W$, since then also $T^{-1}y \in W$. Thus $TW' \subseteq W'$ for all $T \in \mathcal{H}$. If $e_i \in W$ and $e_j \notin W$, then $S_j e_i = e_i - 2\alpha_{ij} e_j \in W$; so $\alpha_{ij} = 0$, or $p_{ij} = 2$, for otherwise $e_j \in W$. The same reasoning shows that if $e_i \in W'$ and $e_j \notin W'$, then $p_{ij} = 2$. Since $\mathcal{G}$ is indecomposable, it follows that no $e_i$ is in either $W$ or $W'$. Write $e_1 = x + y$, with $x \in W$, $y \in W'$. Then $S_1 x = x - 2(x, a_1) e_1 \in W$, and
$$2(x, a_1) e_1 = x - S_1 x \in W;$$
so $(x, a_1) = 0$ and $S_1 x = x$, for otherwise $e_1 \in W$. Similarly, $S_1 y = y$; so
$$-e_1 = S_1 e_1 = S_1(x + y) = x + y = e_1,$$
a contradiction.

We define another bilinear form $B$ on $\mathbb{R}^n$ by setting $B

transformation on $V$ such that $ST = TS$ for all $T \in \mathcal{H}$, then $S$ is non-singular.

Proof
Let $W$ be the null space of $S$. Then $W \neq V$ since $S \neq 0$. If $x \in W$ and $T \in \mathcal{H}$, then $STx = TSx = T0 = 0$, so $Tx \in W$. Thus $W$ is $\mathcal{H}$-invariant, so $W = 0$, and $S$ is nonsingular.

Corollary
If $S$ has an eigenvalue $\lambda$ in $\mathcal{F}$, then $S = \lambda 1$.

Proof
The transformation $S - \lambda 1$ also commutes with all $T \in \mathcal{H}$. If $S - \lambda 1$ were nonzero, it would be nonsingular by Schur’s Lemma, contradicting the definition of an eigenvalue.

Suppose that $\mathcal{H} = \{R_1, R_2, \ldots, R_m\}$, and let $R_i$ be represented by the matrix $M_i$ with respect to the basis $\{e_1, \ldots, e_n\}$. If we set $P = \Sigma_{i=1}^m M_i^t M_i$, then $P$ is easily seen to be symmetric and positive definite. In fact,

$$C(x, y) = \Sigma_i (R_i x, R_i y) = \Sigma_i (M_i x, M_i y)$$
$$= \Sigma_i (M_i^t M_i x, y) = (Px, y).$$

Proposition 6.1.9
If $T \in \mathcal{H}$ is represented by the matrix $M$ with respect to the basis $\{e_1, \ldots, e_n\}$, then

$$M(P^{-1}A) = (P^{-1}A)M.$$

Proof
Since the forms $B$ and $C$ are $\mathcal{H}$-invariant, we have

$$C(P^{-1}Ax, y) = (PP^{-1}Ax, y)

Proof

Since the matrix $P^{-1}$ is positive definite, we may write $P^{-1} = NN^t$, where $N$ is a nonsingular real matrix (see [1], p. 256). If $T \in \mathcal{H}$ is represented by the matrix $M$ with respect to the basis $\{e_1, \ldots, e_n\}$, then $T$ is represented by the matrix $N^{-1}MN$ with respect to the basis of columns of $N$. By Proposition 6.1.9 we have

$$\begin{align*}
(N^{-1}MN)(N^tAN) &= N^{-1}M(P^{-1}A)N = N^{-1}(P^{-1}A)MN \\
&= N^{-1}NN^tAMN = (N^tAN)(N^{-1}MN).
\end{align*}$$

Thus the transformation $S$ represented by the matrix $N^tAN$ with respect to the basis of columns of $N$ commutes with all $T \in \mathcal{H}$. Since $N^tAN$ is symmetric, its eigenvalues are real; so by Proposition 6.1.7 and the Corollary to Schur’s Lemma we see that $N^tAN = \lambda I$ for some nonzero scalar $\lambda$. Thus

$$A = \lambda(N^t)^{-1}N^{-1} = \lambda(NN^t)^{-1} = \lambda P,$$

so

$$B(x, y) = (Ax, y) = \lambda(Px, y) = \lambda C(x, y).$$

Since $1 = B(e_1, e_1) = \lambda C(e_1, e_1)$ and $C(e_1, e_1) > 0$, we see that $\lambda > 0$, and the theorem is proved.

Let us denote by $V$ the vector space $\mathcal{R}^n$ endowed with the inner product $B$.

Theorem 6.1.11 (Coxeter)

The group $\mathcal{H}$ is a Coxeter subgroup of $\mathcal{O}(V)$, and $\mathcal{G}$ is isomorphic with $\mathcal{H

Exercises

6.1 Suppose that $G$ has a presentation $\langle S | R \rangle$ and that $\psi$ is a function from $S$ into a group $H$. Suppose further that each relation in $R$ becomes $1 \in H$ if each $T \in S$ that appears in the relation is replaced by $\psi(T)$ [loosely speaking we say that the elements of $\psi(S) \subseteq H$ also satisfy the relations in $R$]. Show that $\psi$ can be extended to a homomorphism from $G$ into $H$.

6.2 Suppose that $G_1$ and $G_2$ are finite groups with presentations $\langle S_1 | R_1 \rangle$ and $\langle S_2 | R_2 \rangle$, where $S_1$ and $S_2$ are disjoint sets. Show that $G_1 \times G_2$ has the presentation $\langle S_1 \cup S_2 | R_1 \cup R_2 \cup R \rangle$, where $R$ is the set of all relations $S^{-1} T^{-1} ST = 1$, with $S \in S_1$, $T \in S_2$.

6.3 Show that the modified procedure discussed on page 92 produces a word $W'$ with one fewer partial words of length $u$.

6.4 Verify that the following statement provides a geometrical interpretation of Proposition 6.1.3: Of all the fundamental regions sharing a common edge, there is a unique one with the highest Roman numeral.

6.5 Show that the relation

$$S_1 S_2 S_1 S_3 S_2 S_3 S_2 S_1 S_3 S_2 S_3 S_1 S_2 S_1 S_3 S_1 S_2 S_1 S_2 = 1$$

is a consequence of the relations

$$S_i^2 = (S_1 S_2)^5 = (S_1 S_3)^2 = (S_2 S_3)^3 = 1$$

in the group $I^* = I_3$ of the icosahedron. It may be helpful to sketch paths on the surface of

(c) If a mark $p_{ij}$ on the Coxeter graph of $\mathcal{G}$ is odd, show that $S_i S_j$ is a commutator [e.g., if $p_{ij} = 5$, then $S_i S_j = S_j S_i S_j S_i S_j S_i S_j = S_j^{-1}(S_i S_j S_i)^{-1} S_j(S_i S_j S_i)]$.

(d) If $\mathcal{G}$ is irreducible and if every mark $p_{ij}$ is odd, show that $\mathcal{H} = \mathcal{G}'$, the commutator subgroup of $\mathcal{G}$, so $\mathcal{G}'$ has index 2 in $\mathcal{G}$.

(e) In the cases not covered by part (d), show that $\mathcal{G}'$ has index 4 in $\mathcal{G}$ (see [12], p. 126).

6.9 Suppose that $\mathcal{G}$ is a Coxeter group.

(a) Show that there can be at most one element $T$ such that $T(\Delta^+) = \Delta^-$.

(b) If $T \in \mathcal{G}$ and $T(\Delta^+) \neq \Delta^-$, show that $-r_i \notin T(\Delta^+)$ for some $r_i \in \Pi$. Conclude that $n(S_i T) = n(T) + 1$ (see the proof of Proposition 6.1.1).

(c) Show that there is an element $T \in \mathcal{G}$ such that $T(\Delta^+) = \Delta^-$, and conclude that $\mathcal{G}$ has a unique element with maximal length.

The remaining exercises require some preliminary discussion.

If $\mathcal{G}$ is a Coxeter group with fundamental reflections $S_1, \ldots, S_n$, then a Coxeter element of $\mathcal{G}$ is any product

$$S_{\pi(1)} S_{\pi(2)} \cdots S_{\pi(n)},$$

where $\pi$ is a permutation of $\{1, 2, \ldots, n\}$. If $\mathcal{G}$ is irreducible and its Coxeter graph has no branch points,

(b) If two adjacent factors with nonadjacent subscripts are interchanged, then a Coxeter element is unchanged.

(c) Use (a) and (b) to show that if adjacent factors with adjacent subscripts are interchanged in a Coxeter element, then the resulting Coxeter element is conjugate with the original [e.g., $S_1 S_2 S_{i_3} \cdots S_{i_n} = S_1 (S_2 S_{i_3} \cdots S_{i_n} S_1) S_1^{-1} = S_1 (S_2 S_{i_3} \cdots S_{i_n} S_1) S_1^{-1} = \cdots = S_1 (S_2 S_1 S_{i_3} \cdots S_{i_n}) S_1^{-1}]$.

(d) Conclude that all Coxeter elements of $\mathcal{G}$ are conjugate with one another.

6.11 Show that all Coxeter elements of a Coxeter group $\mathcal{G}$ (possibly reducible) are conjugate with one another.

6.12 Find the distinct Coxeter elements in the groups of symmetries of the tetrahedron, cube, and icosahedron.<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>

chapter 7

INVARIANTS

7.1 INTRODUCTION

The $2 \times 2$ matrix

$$A = \begin{bmatrix} -1/2 & \sqrt{3}/2 \\ \sqrt{3}/2 & 1/2 \end{bmatrix}$$

acts on polynomials in two variables $X, Y$; it replaces $X$ by $-(1/2)X + (\sqrt{3}/2)Y$ and $Y$ by $(\sqrt{3}/2)X + (1/2)Y$. For example, if $f = X^2 - XY$ then

$$Af = \left( -\frac{1}{2}X + \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}Y \right)^2 - \left( -\frac{1}{2}X + \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}Y \right)\left( \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}X + \frac{1}{2}Y \right)$$

$$= \left( \frac{1 + \sqrt{3}}{4} \right)X^2 - \left( \frac{1 + \sqrt{3}}{2} \right)XY + \left( \frac{3 - \sqrt{3}}{4} \right)Y^2.$$

If

$$B = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 \\ 0 & -1 \end{bmatrix}$$ then $Bf = X^2 + XY.$

The matrices $A$ and $B$ above generate the dihedral group $\mathcal{H}_2^3$ of order 6. If $f_1$ is the polynomial $X^2 + Y^2$ then clearly $Af_1 = f_1$ and $Bf_1 = f_1$ since $A$ and $B$ are orthogonal matrices and $f_1$ is the square of the length function for a vector with entries $X$ and $Y$. It follows that $Cf_1 = f_1$ for all $C \in \mathcal{H}_2^3$.<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>

In general a polynomial $f$ is an invariant for a group $\mathcal{G}$ if $Tf = f$ for all $T$ in $\mathcal{G}$. It is straightforward to verify that $f_2 = X^3 - 3XY^2$ is also an invariant for $\mathcal{H}_2^3$ as represented above, though it may be less clear how $f_2$ might be obtained. It is perhaps even less clear, but it is true, that all possible invariants of $\mathcal{H}_2^3$ are generated by $f_1$ and $f_2$. Moreover $f_1$ and $f_2$ are independent, in the sense that there is no nonzero polynomial $g$ with $g(f_1, f_2) = 0$. A change of coordinate systems makes it clear that $f_2$ is an invariant (see Exercise 7.12).

The dihedral group of order 6 can also be represented as $\mathcal{H}_3^3] \mathcal{C}_3^3$, for which we may take as generators the permutation matrices

$$A^* = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 \\ 0 & 1 & 0 \end{bmatrix} \quad \text{and} \quad B^* = \begin{bmatrix} 0 & 1 & 0 \\ 1 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix}.$$

Then the "elementary symmetric polynomials" $\sigma_1 = X + Y + Z$, $\sigma_2 = XY + XZ + YZ$, and $\sigma_3 = XYZ$ are invariants, they generate all the invariants, and they are independent in the sense mentioned above.

It is generally quite difficult to describe explicitly all the invariants of a given group (see Exercise 7.14 to see that the situation can be quite complicated even for a cyclic group of order 4). The theory is reasonably manageable, however, for finite reflection groups. We shall see that each reflection group $\mathcal{G} \leq \mathcal{O}(V)$ has a set of $n$ ($= \dim V$)

true that if $Z_1, \ldots, Z_n$ are distinct commuting indeterminates over $\mathcal{R}$ then the map from the polynomial algebra $\mathcal{R}[Z_1, \ldots, Z_n]$ to $\mathcal{P}$ determined by $Z_i \mapsto Y_i$ is an $\mathcal{R}$-isomorphism (this depends on the fact that $\mathcal{R}$ is an infinite field). As an important consequence we may carry over to $\mathcal{P}$ some of the standard concepts connected with polynomials. In particular the function $\alpha Y_1^{a_1} Y_2^{a_2} \cdots Y_n^{a_n}$, with $0 \neq \alpha \in \mathcal{R}$ and $0 \leq a_i \in \mathbb{Z}$ for all $i$ is called a monomial of degree $d = \Sigma_i a_i$. Thus each $f \neq 0$ in $\mathcal{P}$ can be written uniquely as a sum of monomials in $Y_1, \ldots, Y_n$ with distinct sequences $(a_1, \ldots, a_n)$ of exponents. The degree (relative to $Y_1, \ldots, Y_n$) of any $f \neq 0$ in $\mathcal{P}$ is the maximum of the degrees of its unique monomial summands.

If $f \in \mathcal{P}$ we may write $f = f(Y_1, \ldots, Y_n)$, and then substitute suitable quantities $\gamma_1, \ldots, \gamma_n$ to obtain $f(\gamma_1, \ldots, \gamma_n)$. This will not tend to cause confusion with the notation $f(v)$, $v \in V$, reflecting the fact that $f$ is a function from $V$ to $\mathcal{R}$. In fact, $f(v)$ is the result of the substitution $f(Y_1(v), \ldots, Y_n(v))$.

The linear (i.e., degree 1) polynomials $Y_1, \ldots, Y_n$ are determined by the fact that $Y_i(x_j) = \delta_{ij}$, $1 \leq i, j \leq n$, so their definition, and hence that of $\mathcal{P

Proof
If $v \in V$ then $((ST)f)(v) = f((ST)^{-1}v) = f(T^{-1}S^{-1}v) = (Tf)(S^{-1}v) = (S(Tf))(v)$, so $(ST)f = S(Tf)$.

The proposition makes clear why the inverse appears in the definition of the action of $T$ on $f$.

If $0 \neq r \in V$ define a linear polynomial $L_r \in \mathfrak{P}_1$ by setting $L_r(v) = -2(v, r)/\|r\|^2$, all $v \in V$, so $L_r(r) = -2$. The null space (zero set) of $L_r$ is the hyperplane $r^\perp$.

If $v \in V$ write $v = x + \alpha r$, with $x \in r^\perp$ and $\alpha \in \mathfrak{R}$. Then $L_rv = L_rx + \alpha L_rr = -2\alpha$. Thus if $S_r$ is the reflection along $r$ then $S_rv = S_r(x + \alpha r) = x - \alpha r$, and so

$$S_rv = v + (L_rv)r$$

for all $v \in V$.

Proposition 7.2.2
If $0 \neq r \in V$ then the linear polynomial $L_r$ is a divisor of $S_rf - f$ for all $f \in \mathfrak{P}$.

Proof
By appropriate choice of basis there is no loss of generality in assuming that $r = y_1$, and hence $L_r = (-2/\|y_1\|^2)Y_1$, which is a divisor of $S_rf - f$ if and only $Y_1$ is. We have $(S_rf - f)(v) = f(S_rv) - f(v) = f(v + (L_rv)r) - f(v) = f(v - (2/\|y_1\|^2)(Y_1v)r) - f(v)$, which becomes $f(v) - f(v) = 0$

d then $\mathfrak{J}$ is the direct sum $\mathfrak{J}_0 \oplus \mathfrak{J}_1 \oplus \mathfrak{J}_2 \oplus \cdots$ of its subspaces of homogeneous invariants.

One of the main problems of classical nineteenth century invariant theory was the determination of generators for the algebra $\mathfrak{J}$ of invariants for specific groups $\mathcal{G}$. For a familiar example, recall the Fundamental Theorem of Symmetric Polynomials (in which $\mathcal{G}$ is the symmetric group $\mathcal{S}_n$): every symmetric polynomial (invariant of $\mathcal{S}_n$) is a polynomial in the "elementary symmetric polynomials" $\sigma_1 = \Sigma_i Y_i, \ldots, \sigma_n = \Pi_1^n Y_i$.

If $\mathcal{G}$ is a finite subgroup of $\mathcal{GL}(V)$ define $M_{\mathcal{G}} = M: \mathfrak{P} \rightarrow \mathfrak{P}$ by setting

$$Mf = |\mathcal{G}|^{-1} \Sigma \{Tf: T \in \mathcal{G}\}$$

for all $f \in \mathfrak{P}$. Think of $Mf$ as the mean, or average, of the $\mathcal{G}$-transforms of $f$. Clearly $M$ is a linear transformation, and $M\mathfrak{P}_d \subseteq \mathfrak{P}_d$ for each degree $d$.

**Proposition 7.3.1**

Suppose $\mathcal{G} \leq \mathcal{GL}(V)$ is finite. Then

(i) if $f \in \mathfrak{P}$ then $Mf \in \mathfrak{J}$, and

(ii) $M^2 = M$, and $M$ restricts to the identity map on $\mathfrak{J}$.

Thus $M$ is a projection from $\mathfrak{P}$ onto $\mathfrak{J}$.

**Proof**

(i) If $S \in \mathcal{G}$ then $SMf = |\mathcal{G}|^{-1}

each $T \in \mathcal{G}$, and $(Th)(0) = h(T^{-1}0) = h(0) = 0$. It follows that $Mh$ is homogeneous and $(Mh)(0) = (0)$. Since $Mh \in \mathfrak{J}$ by Proposition 7.3.1 we see that $Mh \in \mathfrak{J}_h^+ \subseteq \mathfrak{a}$. In general $h$ is a sum $h_1 + h_2 + \cdots + h_k$ of homogeneous polynomials, with $h_i(0) = 0$ for each $i$. Thus $Mh = \Sigma_i Mh_i \in \mathfrak{a}$.

Our chief concern is the description of $\mathfrak{J}(\mathcal{G})$ when $\mathcal{G}$ is a reflection group. Assume for the remainder of this section that $\mathcal{G}$ is generated by reflections, with the usual notation for its root system, etc. We do not, however, assume that $\mathcal{G}$ is effective.

**Proposition 7.3.3**

Suppose $g_1, g_2, \ldots, g_k \in \mathfrak{J}; h_1, h_2, \ldots, h_k$ are homogeneous in $\mathfrak{P}$; and $g_1h_1 + \cdots + g_kh_k = 0$. Then either $h_1 \in \mathfrak{a}$ or else $g_1$ is in the ideal $\mathfrak{b}$ in $\mathfrak{J}$ generated by $g_2, \ldots, g_k$.

**Proof**

Use induction on the degree of $h_1$. If $h_1 = 0$ then $h_1 \in \mathfrak{a}$; if $\deg h_1 = 0$ then $g_1 = -(h_2/h_1)g_2 - \cdots - (h_k/h_1)g_k$, and hence $g_1 = Mg_1 = -(Mh_2/h_1)g_2 - \cdots - (Mh_k/h_

Proof

Suppose not. Then there is a nonzero polynomial $g = g(Z_1, \ldots, Z_m) \in \mathcal{R}[Z_1, \ldots, Z_m]$ with $g(f_1, \ldots, f_m) = 0$. We may take $g$ to be of minimal degree. Viewing each $f_i$ as a polynomial in $Y_1, \ldots, Y_n$ we may view $g(f_1, \ldots, f_m)$ as a polynomial in $Y_1, \ldots, Y_n$ in which all terms cancel to yield 0. All homogeneous components of each degree must vanish, so by considering each degree separately we may effectively assume that $g(f_1, \ldots, f_m)$ has monomial summands all of the same degree $d > 0$ in $Y_1, \ldots, Y_n$.

For $1 \leq i \leq m$ set $g_i = g_i(f_1, \ldots, f_m) = \partial g / \partial f_i \in \mathfrak{I}$, and note that each $g_i$ is either 0 or is homogeneous of degree $d - \deg f_i$ in $Y_1, \ldots, Y_n$. Not all $g_i$ are 0 since $g$ is not constant. Let $\mathfrak{c}$ be the ideal in $\mathfrak{I}$ generated by $\{g_1, \ldots, g_k\}$, and relabel if necessary so that $\mathfrak{c}$ is generated by $\{g_1, \ldots, g_k\}$ but by no proper subset. Thus for $k < i \leq m$ there are elements $h_{ij} \in \mathfrak{I}$ such that $g_i = \Sigma_{j=1}^{k} h_{ij} g_j$. Again, by considering degrees one at a time, we may assume that each $h_{ij}$ is homogeneous of degree $\deg g_i - \deg g_j$ (if $h_{ij} \neq 0$), and conclude that $\deg h_{ij} = (d - \deg g_j) - (d - \deg g_i) = \deg

Euler’s Formula (see Exercise 7.4) says that $\Sigma_s Y_s(\partial f_j / \partial Y_s) = (\deg f_j)f_j$, so we have

$$(\deg f_1)f_1 + \Sigma_{j=k+1}^m (\deg f_j)h_{j1}f_j = \Sigma_{i=1}^m (\Sigma_s r_{is}Y_s)f_i.$$

Each coefficient $\Sigma_s r_{is}Y_s$ of $f_i$ on the right is clearly either 0 or else has positive degree. It follows that the coefficient $\Sigma_s r_{1s}Y_s$ of $f_1$ on the right is 0, since all monomials on the left have degree equal to $\deg f_1$. Thus $f_1$ is in the ideal generated by $\{f_2, \ldots, f_m\}$, contradicting the minimality of $m$, and the proof is complete.

Theorem 7.3.5 (Shephard and Todd, Chevalley)

Every invariant of $\mathcal{G}$ is a polynomial over $\mathcal{R}$ in the basic generators $f_1, \ldots, f_m$, and hence $\mathfrak{J} = \mathcal{R}[f_1, \ldots, f_m]$.

Proof

Clearly $\mathcal{R}[f_1, \ldots, f_m] \subseteq \mathfrak{J}$; we use induction on $d$ to show that $\mathfrak{J}_d \subseteq \mathcal{R}[f_1, \ldots, f_m]$ for all degrees $d$. The inclusion is clear when $d = 0$, so take $d > 0$ and assume the inclusion for degrees less than $d$. If $g \in \mathfrak{J}_d$ then $g \in \mathfrak{a}$, so write $g = \Sigma_{i=1}^m g_i f_i$, with $g_i \in \mathfrak{P}$. Since $g$ and all $f_i$ are homogeneous we may assume that each $g_i$ is homogeneous and hence, if $g_i \neq 0$, that $\

7.4 THE MOLIEN SERIES

In this section we will utilize various formal power series in $t$, usually as expansions of rational functions. Convergence will generally not be an issue. We continue to use the notation developed in Sections 7.2 and 7.3.

If $T \in \mathcal{GL}(V)$ then $T$ acts on $\mathfrak{P} = \mathfrak{P}(V)$, and $T$ restricts to a linear transformation on each $\mathfrak{P}_d$, which is finite dimensional. We shall write $\text{tr}_d T$ for the trace of $T \mid \mathfrak{P}_d$. Write $\mathbb{Z}_+$ for the nonnegative integers, and $\mathbb{Z}_+^n$ for the Cartesian product of $n$ copies of $\mathbb{Z}_+$.

Proposition 7.4.1

If $T \in \mathcal{GL}(V)$ then $\Sigma_{d=0}^{\infty} (\text{tr}_d T) t^d = \det(1 - t T^{-1})^{-1}$.

Proof

It will be convenient for the proof to extend the field of scalars of $V$ temporarily from $\mathcal{R}$ to $\mathbb{C}$, in order to have access to eigenvalues. Then we may choose a basis $\{x_1, \ldots, x_n\}$ for $V$ so that $T$ is represented by a triangular matrix, with eigenvalues $\lambda_1, \ldots, \lambda_n$. Also $\{\Sigma_{i=1}^n Y_i^{a_i}: (a_1, \ldots, a_n) \in \mathbb{Z}_+^n, \Sigma_i a_i = d\}$ is a basis for $\mathfrak{P}_d$ (Exercise 7.5), and if that basis is ordered lexicographically then $T \mid \mathfrak{P}_d$ is also represented by a triangular matrix (Exercise 7.6), with eigenvalues $\{\Pi_{i=1}^n \lambda_i^{-a_i}: (a_1, \ldots, a_n) \in \mathbb{Z}_+^n, \Sigma_i a_i

Corollary 2
The dimension of $\mathfrak{P}_d$ is $\binom{n+d-1}{d}$, all $d$.

Proof
See Exercise 7.8.

Proposition 7.4.2
Suppose $W$ is a subspace of $V$ and $P$ is a projection of $V$ onto $W$, i.e. $PV = W$ and $P^2 = P$. Then $\dim W = \text{tr } P$.

Proof
We have $P \mid W = 1_W$, and we may take $W' = (1-P)V$ as a complement to $W$. Then $V = W \oplus W'$ and $P \mid W' = 0$, so $P$ is represented by the matrix $\begin{bmatrix} 1_W & 0 \\ 0 & 0 \end{bmatrix}$ and $\dim W = \text{tr } P$.

Suppose now that $\mathcal{G} \leq \mathcal{GL}(V)$ is finite, with algebra $\mathfrak{J}$ of invariants. Define the Molien series of $\mathcal{G}$ to be the power series

$$\Phi(t) = \Phi_{\mathcal{G}}(t) = \Sigma_{d=0}^{\infty} (\dim \mathfrak{J}_d) t^d.$$

For example, the Molien series is

$$\Phi(t) = (1-t)^{-n} = \Sigma_{d=0}^{\infty} \binom{n+d-1}{d} t^n$$

for the trivial group $\mathcal{G} = \{1\}$, by the corollaries to Proposition 7.4.1.

Proposition 7.4.3
If $\mathcal{G} \leq \mathcal{GL}(V)$ is finite then $\dim \mathfrak{J}_d = |\mathcal{G}|^{-1} \Sigma \{ \text{tr}_d T : T \in \mathcal{G} \}$.

Proof
By the corollary to Proposition 7.3.1 the averaging operator $M$ is a projection from $\mathfrak{P}_d$ onto $\mathfrak{J}_

Proof
Apply Propositions 7.4.1 and 7.4.3:

$$\Phi(t) = \Sigma_{d=0}^{\infty} (\dim \Im_d) t^d = \Sigma_{d=0}^{\infty} |\mathcal{G}|^{-1} \Sigma \{ \text{tr}_d T: T \in \mathcal{G} \} t^d$$
$$= |\mathcal{G}|^{-1} \Sigma \{ \Sigma_{d=0}^{\infty} (\text{tr}_d T) t^d: T \in \mathcal{G} \}$$
$$= |\mathcal{G}|^{-1} \Sigma \{ \det(1 - tT^{-1})^{-1}: T \in \mathcal{G} \}$$
$$= |\mathcal{G}|^{-1} \Sigma \{ \det(1 - tT)^{-1}: T \in \mathcal{G} \}.$$

Molien's Theorem will be instrumental in the proof of a converse to Theorems 7.3.4–7.3.6. Let us apply it to compute the Molien series for two simple examples. We use the fact that $\det(1 - tT)^{-1} = (\det T^{-1}) / \det(T^{-1} - t1)$, the denominator being the characteristic polynomial of $T^{-1}$.

1. If $\mathcal{G} = \mathcal{A}_2$ we may take

$$\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix}, \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 \\ 0 & -1 \end{bmatrix}, \text{ and } \begin{bmatrix} -1/2 & -\sqrt{3}/2 \\ \sqrt{3}/2 & -1/2 \end{bmatrix}$$

as representatives of the conjugacy classes, of respective sizes 1, 3, and 2. Thus

$$\Phi(t) = \frac{1}{6} \left[ \frac{1}{(1 - t)^2} + \frac{2}{1 + t + t^2} + \frac{3}{1 - t^2} \right

i.e., that $\Im(\mathcal{G}) = \mathcal{R}[f_1, \ldots, f_n]$ for an algebraically independent set $\{f_1, \ldots, f_n\}$ of basic generating homogeneous invariants. Note that the number $n$ of basic generators must equal $\dim V$, since the proof of Theorem 7.3.6 depends only on the conclusions of Theorems 7.3.4 and 7.3.5. Say $\deg f_i = d_i$, with $d_1 \leq d_2 \leq \cdots \leq d_n$. Observe that $\{\Pi_{i=1}^n f_i^{a_i} : (a_1, \ldots, a_n) \in \mathbb{Z}_+^n, \Sigma_i a_i d_i = d\}$ is a (vector space) basis for $\Im_d$ for each dimension $d$.

**Proposition 7.4.5**

Under the assumptions above the Molien series of $\mathcal{G}$ is $\Phi(t) = \Pi_{i=1}^n (1 - t^{d_i})^{-1}$.

**Proof**

$$\Pi_{i=1}^n (1 - t^{d_i})^{-1} = \Pi_{i=1}^n (1 + t^{d_i} + t^{2d_i} + \cdots) = \Sigma_d^\infty \alpha_d t^d,$$ where

$$\alpha_d = |\{(a_1, \ldots, a_n) \in \mathbb{Z}_+^n : \Sigma_i a_i d_i = d\}| = \dim \Im_d$$

by the observation preceding the proposition.

The basic generators $f_1, \ldots, f_n$ are generally not unique, which perhaps makes the next proposition somewhat surprising.

**Proposition 7.4.6**

The degrees $d_1, d_2, \ldots, d_n$ of the basic generators are uniquely determined by $\mathcal{G}$.

**Proof**

Suppose also that $\Im = \mathcal{R}[f_1', \ldots, f_n']$, with $\{f_i'\}$ algebraically independent and $\deg f_i' = d_i',$

Proposition 7.4.7
$$|\mathcal{G}| = \Pi_{i=1}^{n} d_{i}.$$

Proof
For each $T \neq 1$ in $\mathcal{G}$ define $h_T(t) = (1 - t)^{n-1} \det(1 - tT)^{-1}$, using the factors $1 - t$ to cancel any factors of $\det(1 - tT)^{-1}$ resulting from eigenvalues of 1. Thus $h_T(1) = 0$ unless $T$ is a reflection, in which case $h_T(1) = 1/2$. Check by multiplying that $(1 - t)(1 - t^{d_i})^{-1} = (1 + t + t^2 + \cdots + t^{d_i-1})^{-1}$. By Molien’s Theorem (7.4.4) and Proposition 7.4.5 we have
$$\Pi_{i=1}^{n}(1 - t^{d_i})^{-1} = |\mathcal{G}|^{-1} \Sigma\{\det(1 - tT)^{-1}: T \in \mathcal{G}\}.$$
Multiply both sides by $(1 - t)^n$ to obtain
$$\Pi_{i=1}^{n}(1 + t + t^2 + \cdots + t^{d_i-1})^{-1} = |\mathcal{G}|^{-1}[1 + \Sigma\{(1 - t)h_T(t): 1 \neq T \in \mathcal{G}\}],$$
and then set $t = 1$ to obtain $\Pi_{i=1}^{n} d_{i}^{-1} = |\mathcal{G}|^{-1}$.

Proposition 7.4.8
The number $N$ of reflections in $\mathcal{G}$ is $\Sigma_{i=1}^{n}(d_i - 1)$.

Proof
For each $T \in \mathcal{G}$ that is neither 1 nor a reflection define $g_T(t) = (1 - t)^{n-2} \det(1 - tT)^{-1}$, canceling any factors $1 - t$ resulting from eigenvalues of 1 for $T$. Thus

Set $t = 1$ and obtain

$$\Sigma_{i=1}^{n} \left( -d_{i}^{-2} \left[ \left( d_{i} - 1 \right) d_{i}/2 \right] \Pi_{j \neq i} d_{j}^{-1} \right) = -|\mathcal{G}|^{-1} \Sigma_{i=1}^{n} \left( d_{i} - 1 \right)/2$$

on the left, by Proposition 7.4.7, and on the right $-|\mathcal{G}|^{-1} N/2$. Cancel $-|\mathcal{G}|^{-1}/2$ and the proposition follows.

Corollary
If $\mathcal{G} \neq 1$ then $\mathcal{G}$ contains at least one reflection.

Proof
Since $\mathcal{G} \neq 1$ we have $d_{n} > 1$ by Proposition 7.4.7, so $N = \Sigma_{i=1}^{n} \left( d_{i} - 1 \right) > 0$.

Theorem 7.4.9 (Shephard and Todd)
Suppose $\mathcal{G} \leq \mathcal{GL}(V)$ is finite and that $\mathcal{G}$ has algebraically independent homogeneous invariants $f_{1}, \ldots, f_{n}$, $n = \dim V$, such that $\Im = \mathcal{R}[f_{1}, \ldots, f_{n}]$. Then $\mathcal{G}$ is generated by reflections.

Proof
As we observed above we may assume that $\mathcal{G} \leq \mathcal{O}(V)$. Let $\mathcal{H}$ be the subgroup of $\mathcal{G}$ generated by the reflections in $\mathcal{G}$. We may assume that $\mathcal{G} \neq 1$ and hence also that $\mathcal{H} \neq 1$ by the corollary above. By Theorems 7.3.4–7.3.6 we have $\Im(\mathcal{H}) = \mathcal{R}[h_{1}, \ldots, h_{n}]$ for basic generators $h_{1}, \ldots, h

Proof

Suppose $0 \neq L \in \mathfrak{I}_1$, and set $W = \ker L$. For any $x \in V$, $T \in \mathcal{G}$ we have $Lx = (T^{-1}L)x = L(Tx)$, so $L(Tx - x) = 0$ and $Tx - x \in W$. Thus $Tx \in W$ if $x \in W$, and hence $TW = W$ for all $T \in \mathcal{G}$. It follows that $TW^\perp = W^\perp$ (which is 1-dimensional) for all $T \in \mathcal{G}$. Choose $y \neq 0$ in $W^\perp$ and $T \in \mathcal{G}$, so $Ty = \pm y$. But if $Ty = -y$ then $-2y = Ty - y \in W \cap W^\perp$, so $Ty = y$, contradicting the effectiveness of $\mathcal{G}$.

Proposition 7.4.11

A Coxeter group $\mathcal{G}$ has a homogeneous invariant of degree 2, so it must have a basic generator of degree 2.

Proof

If $\{x_1, \ldots, x_n\}$ is chosen to be an orthonormal basis for $V$ then the square $Q$ of the length function, $Q(v) = \|v\|^2$, is equal to $Y_1^2 + \cdots + Y_n^2$; it is invariant since $\mathcal{G} \leq \mathcal{O}(V)$. Since $Q$ is a polynomial in the basic generators it must actually be a scalar multiple of one of them by Proposition 7.4.10.

If $\dim V = 2$ and $\mathcal{G}$ is a Coxeter group with $|\mathcal{G}| = 2m$ then $\mathcal{G}$ is one of $\mathcal{A}_1 \times \mathcal{A}_1$, $\mathcal{A}_2$, $\mathcal{B}_2$, $\mathcal{G}_2$, or $\mathcal{H}_2^m$. It follows from Propositions 7.4.7 and 7.

$X_1 + X_2$, $\sigma_2 = X_0X_1 + X_0X_2 + X_1X_2$, and $\sigma_3 = X_0X_1X_2$ (where $\{X_i\}$ is the dual basis in $(\mathbb{R}^3)^*$ to $\{e_i\}$). However $\mathcal{A}_2$ acts effectively on the subspace $V = (1, 1, 1)^\perp$, with basis $x_1 = e_1 - e_0$, $x_2 = e_2 - e_1$. Restriction of $\mathcal{A}_2$ from $\mathbb{R}^3$ to $V$ entails that $\sigma_1 = X_0 + X_1 + X_2 = 0$, or $X_0 = -(X_1 + X_2)$, leaving basic invariants $\sigma_2 = -(X_1^2 + X_1X_2 + X_2^2)$ and $\sigma_3 = -(X_1 + X_2)X_1X_2$. The vectors $\{x_1, x_2\}$ are a base for $\mathcal{A}_2$ in $V$, and $\mathcal{A}_2$ is generated by their corresponding fundamental reflections, represented by

$$S_1 = \begin{bmatrix} -1 & 1 \\ 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix} \text{ and } S_2 = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 \\ 1 & -1 \end{bmatrix}$$

relative to $\{x_1, x_2\}$. Since $Y_1 = 2X_1 + X_2$ and $Y_2 = X_2 - X_1$ (verify) we may substitute in $\sigma_2$, $\sigma_3$ and take $f_1 = 3Y_1^2 + 5Y_1Y_2 + 3Y_2^2$ and $f_2 = 2Y_1^3 + Y_1^2Y_2 - 5Y_1Y_2^2 + 2Y_2^3$ as basic generators (compare with the example in section 7.

Exercises

7.1 Suppose $V$ has bases $\{x_1, \ldots, x_n\}$ and $\{u_1, \ldots, u_n\}$, with respective dual bases $\{y_1, \ldots, y_n\}$ and $\{v_1, \ldots, v_n\}$. Define corresponding linear polynomials $Y_1, \ldots, Y_n$ and $V_1, \ldots, V_n$. If $A = (a_{ij})$ is the change-of-basis matrix from $\{x_i\}$ to $\{u_i\}$, i.e., $u_i = \Sigma_j a_{ji} x_j$, all $i$, show that $Y_i = \Sigma_j a_{ij} V_j$, all $i$. Similarly, if $B = (b_{ij}) = A^{-1}$, then $V_i = \Sigma_j b_{ij} Y_j$, all $i$. Conclude that the definition of $\mathfrak{P}$ is independent of choice of basis.

7.2 Suppose $T \in \mathcal{GL}(V)$ is represented by $A = (a_{ij})$ relative to the basis $\{x_1, \ldots, x_n\}$, and that $A^{-1} = B = (b_{ij})$.

(a) Show that $TY_i = \Sigma_i b_{ij} Y_i$, $1 \leq i \leq n$, and conclude that $T\mathfrak{P}_1 = \mathfrak{P}_1$.

(b) For any monomial $f = \alpha \prod_i Y_i^{a_i}$ show that $Tf = \alpha \prod_i (TY_i)^{a_i} = \alpha \prod_i (\Sigma_j b_{ij} Y_j)^{a_i}$, and conclude that $T\mathfrak{P}_d = \mathfrak{P}_d$ for each degree $d$.

7.3 Suppose $0 \neq r \in V$, $L \in \mathfrak{P}_1$, and $S_r$ is the reflection along $r$, and suppose that $S_r L = \beta L$, with $0 \neq \beta \in \mathbb{R}$. Show that

7.5 Show that $\{\Pi_{i=1}^{n} Y_{i}^{a_{i}} : (a_{1}, \ldots, a_{n}) \in \mathbb{Z}_{+}^{n}, \Sigma_{i} a_{i} = d\}$ is a basis for $\mathfrak{P}_{d}$ for each degree $d$.

7.6 Suppose $T \in \mathcal{GL}(V)$ is represented by a triangular matrix relative to $\{x_{i}\}$, hence also relative to $\{Y_{i}\}$ on $\mathfrak{P}_{1}$ (see Exercise 7.2). Let $\lambda_{1}, \ldots, \lambda_{n}$ be the eigenvalues of $T$ on $V$. Order the basis of Exercise 7.5 for $\mathfrak{P}_{d}$ lexicographically (e.g. if $n = 3$ and $d = 2$ the ordering is $Y_{1}^{2}, Y_{1}Y_{2}, Y_{1}Y_{3}, Y_{2}^{2}, Y_{2}Y_{3}, Y_{3}^{2}$). Show that then $T$ on $\mathfrak{P}_{d}$ is also represented by a triangular matrix, and that the eigenvalues of $T$ on $\mathfrak{P}_{d}$ are $\{\Pi_{i=1}^{n} \lambda_{i}^{-a_{i}} : (a_{1}, \ldots, a_{n}) \in \mathbb{Z}_{+}^{n}, \Sigma_{i} a_{i} = d\}$.

7.7 (a) Show that $(1 - t)^{-2} = \Sigma_{d=0}^{\infty}(d + 1)t^{d}$. (Hint. Expand $(1 - t)^{-1}$ and differentiate.)
(b) Show that $(1 + t + t^{2})^{-1} = 1 - t + t^{3} - t^{4} + t^{5} - t^{6} + \cdots$.
(Hint. $(1 + t + t^{2})^{-1} = (1 - t)/(1 - t^{3})$).

7.8 (a) If $n \geq 1$ and $d

(a) Show that
$$C^{-1}AC = \begin{bmatrix} \cos 2\pi/m & -\sin 2\pi/m \\ \sin 2\pi/m & \cos 2\pi/m \end{bmatrix} \text{ and } C^{-1}BC = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 \\ 0 & -1 \end{bmatrix},$$
our usual generators for $\mathcal{H}_2^m$.

(b) Use $C$ to change variables: $X_1 = (1/\sqrt{2})(-iY_1 + Y_2)$ and $X_2 = (1/\sqrt{2})(-iY_1 - Y_2)$. Conclude that the basic generators for $\mathcal{H}_2^m$ can be taken to be $f_1 = Y_1^2 + Y_2^2$ and
$$f_2 = \sum_{j=0}^{m/2} (-1)^j \binom{m}{2j} Y_1^{m-2j} Y_2^{2j} \text{ if } m \text{ is even},$$
$$f_2 = \sum_{j=0}^{(m-1)/2} (-1)^j \binom{m}{2j+1} Y_1^{m-2j-1} Y_2^{2j+1} \text{ if } m \text{ is odd}.$$

7.13 If $0 \neq r \in V$, $a, b \in \mathcal{R}$, and $f, g \in \mathfrak{P}$ show that
(a) $\delta_r(af + bg) = a\delta_r f + b\delta_r g$, and
(b) $\delta_r(fg) = f\delta_r g + g\delta_r f + (\delta_r f)(\delta_r g)L_r$.

7.14 (See [34].) Let $\mathcal{G}$ be the cyclic group of order 4 in $\mathcal{O}(\mathcal{R}^2)$ generated by $A = \begin{bmatrix} 0 & -1 \\ 1 & 0 \end{bmatrix}$

(a) Show that
$$\Phi(t

invariant algebra $\mathfrak{I}$, that $\mathfrak{R} = \mathcal{R}(Y_1, \ldots, Y_n)$ is the field of fractions of $\mathfrak{P}$, and that $\mathfrak{L}$ is the field of fractions of $\mathfrak{I}$.

7.15 Show that each $f$ in $\mathfrak{R}$ can be expressed as a fraction with numerator in $\mathfrak{P}$ and denominator in $\mathfrak{I}$. (Hint. Write $f = g/h = g \Pi \{Th: 1 \neq T \in \mathcal{G}\}/\Pi \{Th: T \in \mathcal{G}\}$.)

7.16 Show that the fixed field of $\mathcal{G}$ in $\mathfrak{R}$ is $\mathfrak{L}$ (use Exercise 7.15), and conclude that $\mathfrak{R}$ is a Galois extension of $\mathfrak{L}$ with $[\mathfrak{R} : \mathfrak{L}] = |\mathcal{G}|$.

7.17 The quotient algebra $\mathfrak{P}/\mathfrak{a}$ (see p. 108) inherits a “grading” from $\mathfrak{P}$ via $(\mathfrak{P}/\mathfrak{a})_d = (\mathfrak{P}_d + \mathfrak{a})/\mathfrak{a}$. Show that $\mathfrak{P}/\mathfrak{a} = \oplus_d(\mathfrak{P}/\mathfrak{a})_d$. (It is clear that $\mathfrak{P}/\mathfrak{a} = \Sigma_d(\mathfrak{P}/\mathfrak{a})_d$; use the fact that $\mathfrak{a}$ is generated by homogeneous elements.)

7.18 If $\mathfrak{P}$ is free as an $\mathfrak{I}$-module show that an $\mathfrak{I}$-basis for $\mathfrak{P}$ is also a basis for $\mathfrak{R}$ as an extension of $\mathfrak{L}$ (use Exercise 7

As indicated in the preface, the first systematic account of finite reflection groups was given by Coxeter [9] in 1934, following shortly after E. Cartan utilized the groups in his study of Lie groups and their associated Lie algebras. Coxeter classified not only the finite reflection groups, but also the infinite discrete groups generated by (affine) reflections. The infinite groups were likewise classified in terms of their Coxeter graphs. The relevant graphs are those that appear in Figure 5.4, with the exception of $Z_4$ and $Y_5$, and with the addition of $\circ$, which represents the infinite dihedral group generated by reflections in a pair of parallel mirrors.

There is an unfortunate disparity in the notations used to describe the finite and discrete Coxeter groups and their graphs. We have by and large followed the notation used in [5] by Carter, who to a large extent followed Witt [37]. Another variation appears in Bourbaki [3].

The finite crystallographic reflection group associated with a Lie algebra is called the Weyl group of the Lie algebra. The classification of irreducible Weyl groups gives a classification of simple Lie algebras over the complex field (see [5] or [26]), which in turn provides a local classification of Lie groups (see [22]). Each $\mathcal{B}_n$, for $n \geq 3$, is actually the Weyl group of two nonisomorphic Lie algebras called $B_n$ and $C_n$. The distinction occurs because the crystallographic condition allows a choice in the assignment of relative lengths to the roots of the base, which results in two different invariant lattices.

We have followed Coxeter [9] in attributing the construction of fundamental regions in Chapter 3 to Fricke and Klein. Fundamental<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>

regions were perhaps first utilized in number theory some years earlier. In particular, they played a role in Dirichlet’s study of the group of units in the integers of an algebraic number field. For an elementary account of the role played by fundamental regions in the study of automorphic functions see [29].

It was indicated in Chapter 5 that Witt exhibited the root system of $\mathcal{I}_4$ as a group of unit quaternions. Coxeter showed ([11], p. 32) that the root system of $\mathcal{E}_8$ can be given as the set of units (which is not a group, but a loop) in a system of integral Cayley numbers.

The quadratic forms associated with $A_1, A_2, A_3, D_4, D_5, E_6, E_7,$ and $E_8$ correspond to densest packings of spheres in dimensions 1 through 8. See [11], pp. 235–239, for a discussion and further references.

Finite reflection groups have come to play an important role in the study of finite simple groups. Among the earliest simple groups studied were the “classical groups,” analogues over finite fields of simple Lie groups. Associated with each classical group is a reflection group, which may be viewed as the Weyl group of the corresponding Lie algebra, or may be constructed using certain subgroups of the group itself. A unified treatment of the classical groups, over arbitrary fields, was given by C. Chevalley in 1955, making possible the discovery of several new simple groups. Certain properties of the Chevalley groups were subsequently abstracted by J. Tits, who axiomatized the notion of a group $\mathcal{G}$ with a BN-pair, or a Tits system ([3], p. 22). One of his axioms is that $\mathcal{G}$ has a Weyl group, defined in terms of subgroups of $\mathcal{G}$ (as for the classical groups), which is a reflection group. Further details and references may be found in the excellent survey article by Carter [5], and in [4].

Bourbaki defines Coxeter groups not as reflection groups but in terms of generators and relations. The point of Chapter 6, of course, is that the two

quotient algebra $\mathfrak{P}/\mathfrak{a}$, which is examined in Exercises 7.17–7.22, is called the *coinvariant algebra* of $\mathcal{G}$ (see [24]). If $\mathcal{G}$ is the Weyl group of a semisimple Lie group $\mathcal{H}$ and $\mathcal{B}$ is a Borel subgroup of $\mathcal{H}$ then $\mathfrak{P}/\mathfrak{a}$ is isomorphic with the cohomology algebra of the homogeneous space (or “flag manifold”) $\mathcal{H}/\mathcal{B}$. Flag manifolds have roles to play in the representation theory of Lie groups, in algebraic geometry, and in algebraic topology.

The proper setting for the results of Chapter 7 is actually that of finite “unitary” reflection groups (see [8], [24], [33]). A unitary reflection is a transformation of finite order of a complex Euclidean space having all eigenvalues but one equal to 1, a rather natural extension of the notion of real reflection. The unitary reflection groups were classified by Shephard and Todd in [30], in which they established Theorem 7.4.9, and also Theorem 7.3.5 by means of an exhaustive case-by-case analysis. Shortly thereafter Chevalley, in [7], gave essentially the proof we have presented of Theorem 7.3.5, and it was later observed by Serre that Chevalley’s proof applies as well in the unitary case. In fact, the arguments given in all of Chapter 7 can be applied almost verbatim to establish the corresponding results for unitary reflection groups.

Further historical information concerning reflection groups and related topics may be found in [3], pp. 234–240, and at the ends of the chapters in [10], [24], and [33].<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>

CRYSTALLOGRAPHIC POINT GROUPS

The table below presents two other commonly used notational schemes for the crystallographic point groups, the Schoenflies and the International (or Hermann–Maugin) systems. In the International notation a digit $n$ denotes an $n$-fold rotation; $\bar{n}$ denotes its composition with the central inversion $-1$, which is denoted $\bar{1}$; $m$ denotes a mirror plane; and, e.g., $3/m$ denotes a 3-fold rotation axis perpendicular to $m$. See [27] for more details.

$$\begin{array}{c c c}
G & Schoenflies & International \\
\hline
\mathcal{C}_3^1 & C_1 & 1 \\
\mathcal{C}_3^2 & C_2 & 2 \\
\mathcal{C}_3^3 & C_3 & 3 \\
\mathcal{C}_3^4 & C_4 & 4 \\
\mathcal{C}_3^6 & C_6 & 6 \\
\mathcal{H}_3^2 & D_2 & 222 \\
\mathcal{H}_3^3 & D_3 & 32 \\
\mathcal{H}_3^4 & D_4 & 422 \\
\mathcal{H}_3^6 & D_6 & 622 \\
\mathcal{T} & T & 23 \\
\mathcal{W} & O & 432 \\
(\mathcal{C}_3^1)^* & C_i & \bar{1} \\
(\mathcal{C}_3^2)^* & C_{2h} & 2/m \\
(\mathcal{C}_3^3)^* & S_6 & \bar{3} \\
(\mathcal{C}_3^4)^* & C_{4h} & 4/m \\
(\mathcal{C}_3^6)^* & C_{6h} & 6/m \\
\end{array}$$

$$\begin{array}{c c c}
G & Schoenflies & International \\
\hline
(\mathcal{H}_3^2)^* & D_{2h} & mmm \\

REFERENCES

[1] G. Birkhoff and S. MacLane, A Survey of Modern Algebra, 3rd ed., Macmillan, New York, 1965.

[2] H. F. Blichfeldt, Finite Collineation Groups, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1917.

[3] N. Bourbaki, Groupes et Algèbres de Lie, chaps. 4, 5, and 6. Fascicule XXXIV, Éléments de Mathématique, Hermann, Paris, 1968.

[4] R. Carter, Simple Groups of Lie Type, Wiley-Interscience, London, 1972.

[5] R. Carter, Simple groups and simple lie algebras. J. London Math. Soc. 40 (1965), 193–240.

[6] P. Cartier, Groupes finis engendrés par des symétries, Séminaire C. Chevalley, Expose 14, Paris, 1958.

[7] C. Chevalley, Invariants of finite groups generated by reflections, Amer. J. Math. 77 (1955), 778–782.

[8] H. S. M. Coxeter, Regular Complex Polytopes, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1974.

[9] H. S. M. Coxeter, Discrete groups generated by reflections, Annal. Math. 35 (1934), 588–621.

[10] H. S. M. Coxeter, Regular Polytopes, 2nd ed., Macmillan, New York, 1963.

[11] H. S. M. Coxeter, Twelve Geometric Essays, Southern Illinois University Press, Carbondale, Ill., 1968.

[12] H. S. M. Coxeter and W. O. J. Moser, Generators and Relations for Discrete Groups, 2nd ed., Springer-Verlag, New York, 1965.

[13] H. M. Cundy, and A.

[16] Euclid, *Elements* (3 volumes), translated with introduction and commentary by Sir Thomas L. Heath, 2nd ed., Dover, New York, 1956.

[17] J. Franklin, *Matrix Theory*, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1968.

[18] R. Fricke and F. Klein, *Vorlesungen über die Theorie der automorphen Functionen*, vol. 1, B. G. Teubner, Leipzig, 1897.

[19] L. Grove, *Algebra*, Academic Press, New York, 1983.

[20] M. Hall, *The Theory of Groups*, Macmillan, New York, 1959.

[21] P. Halmos, *Finite Dimensional Vector Spaces*, 2nd ed., Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1958.

[22] S. Helgason, *Differential Geometry and Symmetric Spaces*, Academic Press, New York, 1962.

[23] I. N. Herstein, *Topics in Algebra*, Blaisdell, Waltham, Mass., 1964.

[24] H. Hiller, *Geometry of Coxeter Groups*, Pitman, London, 1982.

[25] N. Iwahori, On the structure of a Hecke ring of a Chevalley group over a finite field, *J. Fac. Sci. Univ. Tokyo* 10 (1964), 215–236.

[26] N. Jacobson, *Lie Algebras*, Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1962.

[27] T. Janssen, *Crystallographic Groups*, North-Holland Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1973.

[28] F. Klein, *Lectures on the Icosahedron*, 2nd ed. (translated by G. G. Morrice), Dover, New York, 1956.

[29] J. Lehner, *A Short Course in Automorphic

INDEX

alternating group 4
automorphic function 27, 125

Baire Category Theorem 52
ball 2
base ($t$-base) 38
basic generators 109
BN-pair 125
Borel subgroup 126
boundary 2
Bourbaki 124, 125
branch 54
branch point 61

Cartan 124
Carter 124, 125
Cartier 125
Cayley numbers 125
center 8
Chevalley 111, 125, 126
classical groups 125
closed set 2
closure 2
coding theory 125
cohomology algebra 126
coinvariant algebra 126

combinatorics 125
commutator subgroup 102
connected graph 57
connected set 3
consequence 84
convex 3
convex hull 45
Coxeter 124, 125
Coxeter element 102
Coxeter graph 54
Coxeter group 37
Coxeter’s theorem 88, 100
crystallographic condition 21, 63
crystallographic group 21, 63, 127
cube 12
cycle 61
cyclic group 7

decomposable 94
degree 106
DeMoivre’s theorem 25
dihedral group 7
Dirichlet 125
distance 2
dodecahedron 12
dual basis 2
dual space 106
Dynkin diagram 54<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>

edge 50
effective 36
elementary symmetric polynomials 105, 108
Euclid 12
Euclidean vector space 1
Euler’s formula 111, 120
Euler’s theorem 10

faithful 4
Fibonacci numbers 26
flag manifold 126
free group 83
Fricke 27, 125
fundamental reflection 41
fundamental region 9, 15, 27
fundamental root 41
Fundamental Theorem of Symmetric Polynomials 108

general linear group 106
generators and relations 84
geometrically different 20
golden section 26
Gram–Schmidt theorem 2
graph 54

half-space 29
Hermann–Maugin system 127
Hilbert Basis Theorem 109
Hippasus 12
homogeneous 106
homogeneous space 126
hyperplane 3

icosahedron 12
indecomposable 94
interior 2
International system 127
invariant 105, 107, 125
irreducible 56
Iwahori 85, 125

kaleidoscope 9
Klein 27, 125

lattice 21, 63
length (of a group element) 85
length (of a vector) 2
Lie algebra 37, 124
Lie group 124, 126
line 3
line segment 3
loop 125

marked graph 54
models 12
Molien series 113
Molien’s theorem 113
monomial 106

negative 38
node 54

octahedron 12
open set 2
orbit 4
orthogonal 1
orthogonal complement 1

partial word 88
path 89
per

regular polyhedra 12
relative closure 3
relatively closed 3
relatively open 2
Roman numerals 89
root 34
root system 36
rotation 3

Schoenflies 127
Schur’s lemma 81, 98
semidirect product 68
Serre 126
Shephard 111, 117, 126
simple group 25, 125
simple root 41
simplex 46
simplicial cone 46
sphere 2
sphere packing 125
split extension 68
stabilizer 4

subgraph 58
symmetric difference 67
symmetric group 3, 65
syzygy 122

t-base 38
Theatetus 12
Tits 125
t-negative 38
Todd 111, 117, 126
t-positive 38
transitive 4

unitary reflection 126

wall 45
Weyl group 124, 126
Witt 124, 125
Witt’s theorem 77
word 83<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>