

CHAPTER III

DIFFERENTIAL GEOMETRY

This chapter is an exposition of some of the basic ideas of Hermitian differential geometry, with applications to Chern classes and holomorphic line bundles. In Sec. 1 we shall give the basic definitions of the Hermitian analogues of the classical concepts of (Riemannian) metric, connection, and curvature. This is carried out in the context of differentiable C-vector bundles over a differentiable manifold $X$. More specific formulas are obtained in the case of holomorphic vector bundles (in Sec. 2) and holomorphic line bundles (in Sec. 4). In Sec. 3 is presented a development of Chern classes from the differential-geometric viewpoint. In Sec. 4 this approach to characteristic class theory is compared with the classifying space approach and with the sheaf-theoretic approach (in the case of line bundles). We prove that the Chern classes are primary obstructions to finding trivial subbundles of a given vector bundle, and, in particular, to the given vector bundle being itself trivial. In the case of line bundles, we give a useful characterization of which cohomology classes in $H^2(X, Z)$ are the first Chern class of a line bundle. Additional references for the material covered here are Chern [2], Griffiths [2], and Kobayashi and Nomizu [1].

1. Hermitian Differential Geometry

In this section we want to develop some of the basic differential-geometric concepts in the context of holomorphic vector bundles and, more generally, differentiable C-vector bundles. The basic purpose is to develop certain concepts such as metrics, connections, and curvatures which will have various applications in later sections. We do not relate these concepts in detail to their more classical counterparts in real differential geometry, as there are recent texts which do this quite well (e.g., Helgason [1] and Kobayashi and Nomizu [1]). We shall give more specific references as we go along.

In this section we shall denote by the term vector bundle a differentiable C-vector bundle over a differentiable manifold, $E \rightarrow X$. An analogous treatment can be given for R-vector bundles, but our applications are primarily<|endoftext|>

to Chern class theory and holomorphic vector bundles, both of which require complex-linear fibres.

Suppose that $E \rightarrow X$ is a vector bundle of rank $r$ and that $f = (e_1, \ldots, e_r)$ is a frame at $x \in X$; i.e., there is a neighborhood $U$ of $x$ and sections $\{e_1, \ldots, e_r\}$, $e_j \in \mathcal{E}(U, E)$, which are linearly independent at each point of $U$. If we want to indicate the dependence of the frame $f$ on the domain of definition $U$, we write $f_U$, although normally this will be understood to be some local neighborhood of a given point. Suppose that $f = f_U$ is a given frame and that $g : U \rightarrow GL(r, \mathbf{C})$ is a differentiable mapping. Then there is an action of $g$ on the set of all frames on the open set $U$ defined by

$$f \rightarrow fg,$$

where

$$(fg)(x) = \left( \sum_{\rho=1}^{r} g_{\rho 1}(x)e_\rho(x), \ldots, \sum_{\rho=1}^{r} g_{\rho r}(x)e_\rho(x) \right) \quad x \in U,$$

is a new frame, i.e., $fg(x) = f(x)g(x)$, and we have the usual matrix product. Clearly, $fg$ is a new frame defined on $U$, and we call such a mapping $g$ a change of frame. Moreover, given any two frames $f$ and $f'$ over $U$, we see that there exists a change of frame $g$ defined over $U$ such that $f' = fg.$†

Using frames, we shall find local representations for all the differential geometric objects that we are going to define. We start by giving a local representation for sections of a vector bundle. Let $E \rightarrow X$ be a vector bundle, and suppose that $\xi \in \mathcal{E}(U, E)$ for $U$ open in $X$. Let $f = (e_1, \ldots, e_r)$ be a frame over $U

where $\xi^\rho(f)$ are defined by (1.1). Suppose that $g$ is a change of frame over $U$. Then we compute that

$$\xi^\rho(fg) = \sum_{\sigma=1}^{r} g_{\rho\sigma}^{-1} \xi^\sigma(f),$$

which implies that

$$\xi(fg) = g^{-1}\xi(f)$$

or

(1.3) $$g\xi(fg) = \xi(f),$$

all products being matrix multiplication at a given point $x \in U$. Therefore (1.1) gives a vector representation for sections $\xi \in \mathcal{E}(U, E)$, and (1.3) shows how the vector is transformed under a change of frame for the vector bundle $E$. Moreover, if $E$ is a holomorphic vector bundle, then we shall also have holomorphic frames, i.e., $f = (e_1, \ldots, e_r), e_j \in \mathcal{O}(U, E)$, and $e_1 \wedge \cdots \wedge e_r(x) \neq 0$, for $x \in U$; and holomorphic changes of frame, i.e., holomorphic mappings $g : U \rightarrow GL(r, \mathbf{C})$. Then with respect to a holomorphic frame we have the vector representation

(1.4) $$\mathcal{O}(U, E) \xrightarrow{\ell_f} \mathcal{O}(U)^r,$$

given by $\xi \rightarrow \xi(f)$ as before, and the transformation rule for a holomorphic change of frame is still given by (1.3).

Our object now is to give definitions of three fundamental differential-geometric concepts: metric, connection, and curvature. We shall then give some examples in the next section to illustrate the definitions.

**Definition 1.1:** Let $E \rightarrow X$ be a vector bundle. A Hermitian metric $h$ on $E$ is an assignment of a Hermitian inner product $\langle, \rangle_x$ to each fibre $E_x$ of $E$ such that for any open set $U \subset X$ and $\xi, \eta \in \mathcal{E}(U,

to the frame $f$. For any $\xi, \eta \in \mathcal{E}(U, E)$, we write

$$\langle \xi, \eta \rangle = \left\langle \sum_{\rho} \xi^{\rho}(f) e_{\rho}, \sum_{\sigma} \eta^{\sigma}(f) e_{\sigma} \right\rangle$$

$$= \sum_{\rho, \sigma} \eta^{\sigma}(f) h_{\sigma \rho}(f) \xi^{\rho}(f)$$

(1.6)

$$\langle \xi, \eta \rangle = {}^t \eta(f) h(f) \xi(f),$$

where the last product is matrix multiplication and $^t A$ denotes the transpose of the matrix $A$. Moreover, if $g$ is a change of frame over $U$, it is easy to check that

(1.7)

$$h(fg) = {}^t \bar{g} h(f) g,$$

which is the transformation law for local representations of the Hermitian metric.

**Theorem 1.2:** Every vector bundle $E \rightarrow X$ admits a Hermitian metric.

**Proof:** There exists a locally finite covering $\{U_{\alpha}\}$ of $X$ and frames $f_{\alpha}$ defined on $U_{\alpha}$. Define a Hermitian metric $h_{\alpha}$ on $E|_{U_{\alpha}}$ by setting, for $\xi, \eta \in E_x, x \in U_{\alpha}$,

$$\langle \xi, \eta \rangle_x^\alpha = {}^t \eta(f_{\alpha})(x) \cdot \xi(f_{\alpha})(x).$$

Now let $\{\rho_{\alpha}\}$ be a $C^\infty$ partition of unity subordinate to the covering $\{U_{\alpha}\}$ and let, for $\xi, \eta \in E_x$,

$$\langle \xi, \eta \rangle_x = \sum \rho_{\alpha}(x) \langle \xi, \eta \rangle_x^\alpha.$$

We can now verify that $\langle , \rangle$ so defined gives a Hermitian metric for $E \rightarrow X$. First, it is clear that if $\xi, \

Proof: We shall define the mapping $\tau$ on presheaves generating the above sheaves

$$\tau_U : \mathcal{E}(U, E) \otimes_{\mathcal{E}(U)} \mathcal{E}(U, E') \longrightarrow \mathcal{E}(E \otimes E')(U)$$

by setting

$$\tau_U(\xi \otimes \eta)(x) = \xi(x) \otimes \eta(x) \in E_x \otimes E'_x.$$

If $f = (e_1, \ldots, e_r)$ and $f' = (e'_1, \ldots, e'_r)$ are frames for $E$ and $E'$ over an open set $U$, then we see that for any $\gamma \in \mathcal{E}(U, E \otimes E')$ we can write

$$\gamma(x) = \sum_{\alpha, \beta} \gamma_{\alpha \beta}(x) e_\alpha(x) \otimes e'_\beta(x), \quad \gamma_{\alpha \beta} \in \mathcal{E}(U).$$

But this shows that

$$\gamma \in \mathcal{E}(U, E) \otimes_{\mathcal{E}(U)} \mathcal{E}(U, E'),$$

and this implies easily that $\{\tau_U\}$ defines a sheaf isomorphism when we pass to the sheaves generated by these presheaves.

Q.E.D.

Corollary 1.4: Let $E$ be a vector bundle over $X$. Then

$$\mathcal{E}^p \otimes_{\mathcal{E}} \mathcal{E}(E) \cong \mathcal{E}^p(E).$$

We denote the image of $\varphi \otimes \xi$ under the isomorphism in Corollary 1.4 by $\varphi \cdot \xi \in \mathcal{E}^p(X, E)$, where $\varphi \in \mathcal{E}^p(X)$ and $\xi \in \mathcal{E}(X, E)$. Suppose that $f$ is a frame for $E$ over $U$. Then we have a local representation for $\xi \in \mathcal{E}^p(U, E)$ similar to (1.2) given by

and, indeed, is an isomorphism. Moreover, we have the transformation law for a change of frame

$$\xi(fg) = g^{-1}\xi(f), \quad \xi \in \mathcal{E}^{\rho}(X, E)$$

exactly as in (1.3) for sections. We now make the following definition.

**Definition 1.5:** Let $E \rightarrow X$ be a vector bundle. Then a connection $D$ on $E \rightarrow X$ is a C-linear mapping

$$D : \mathcal{E}(X, E) \rightarrow \mathcal{E}^{1}(X, E),$$

which satisfies

$$D(\varphi\xi) = d\varphi \cdot \xi + \varphi D\xi,$$

where $\varphi \in \mathcal{E}(X)$ and $\xi \in \mathcal{E}(X, E)$.

**Remarks:** (a) Relation (1.9) implies that $D$ is a first-order differential operator (cf. Sec. 2 in Chap. IV) mapping $\mathcal{E}(X, E)$ to $\mathcal{E}(X, T^{*}(X) \otimes E)$, as we shall see below.

(b) In the case where $E = X \times \mathbf{C}$, the trivial line bundle, we see that we may take ordinary exterior differentiation

$$d : \mathcal{E}(X) \rightarrow \mathcal{E}^{1}(X)$$

as a connection on $E$. Thus a connection is a generalization of exterior differentiation to vector-valued differential forms, and we shall later extend the definition of $D$ to higher-order forms.

We now want to give a local description of a connection. Let $f$ be a frame over $U$ for a vector bundle $E \rightarrow X$, equipped with a connection $D$. Then we define the connection matrix $\theta(D, f)$ associated with the connection $D$ and the frame $f$ by setting

$$\theta(D, f) = \left[ \theta_{\rho\sigma}(D, f) \right], \quad \theta_{\rho\sigma}(D, f) \in \mathcal{E}^{1}(U),$$

where

$$De_{\sigma} = \sum_{\rho=1}^{r} \theta_{\

where we have set

$$d\xi(f) = \begin{bmatrix} d\xi^1(f) \\ \cdot \\ \cdot \\ d\xi^r(f) \end{bmatrix},$$

and the wedge product inside the brackets in (1.11) is ordinary matrix multiplication of matrices with differential form coefficients. Thus we see that

$$D\xi(f) = d\xi(f) + \theta(f)\xi(f)$$

$$= [d + \theta(f)]\xi(f)$$

thinking of $d + \theta(f)$ as being an operator acting on vector-valued functions.

Remark: If we let $E = T(X)$, then the real analogue of a connection in the differential operator sense as defined above defines an affine connection in the usual sense (cf. Helgason [1], Nomizu [1], Sternberg [1], and Kobayashi and Nomizu [1]). If $\omega = (\omega_1, \ldots, \omega_n)$ is a frame for $T^*(X)$ over $U$, then

$$\theta_{\rho\sigma} = \sum_{k=1}^{n} \Gamma_{\sigma k}^{\rho}\omega_k, \quad \Gamma_{\sigma k}^{\rho} \in \mathcal{E}(U).$$

In the classical case these are the Schwarz-Christoffel symbols associated with (or defining) a given connection.

Suppose that $E \rightarrow X$ is a vector bundle equipped with a connection $D$ (as we shall see below, every vector bundle admits a connection). Let Hom $(E, E)$ be the vector bundle whose fibres are Hom($E_x, E_x$). We want to show that the connection $D$ on $E$ induces in a natural manner an element

$$\Theta_E(D) \in \mathcal{E}^2(X, \text{Hom}(E, E)),$$

to be called the curvature tensor.

First we want to give a local description of an arbitrary element $\chi \in \mathcal{E}^p(X, \text{Hom}(E, E))$. Let $f$ be a frame for $E$ over $U$ in $X$. Then $f = (e_1, \ldots, e_r)$ becomes a

defined fibrewise in the natural manner. The frame $f$ gives local representations for elements in $\mathcal{E}(X, E)$ and $\mathcal{E}^p(X, E)$ and the matrix (1.12) is chosen so that the following diagram commutes,

$$\mathcal{E}(U, E) \xrightarrow{\chi} \mathcal{E}^p(U, E)$$
$$\| \| \|$$
$$\mathcal{E}(U)^r \xrightarrow{\chi(f)} [\mathcal{E}^p(U)]^r$$
$$\xi(f) \longrightarrow \chi(f)\xi(f) = \eta(f),$$

where

$$\eta^\rho(f) = \sum_\sigma \chi(f)_{\rho\sigma}\xi^\sigma(f)$$

is matrix multiplication and the vertical isomorphisms are given by (1.2) and (1.8), respectively. Under this convention it is easy to compute how the local representation for $\chi$ behaves under a change of frame; namely, if

$$\eta(fg) = \chi(fg)\xi(fg),$$

then we see that

$$g^{-1}\eta(f) = \chi(fg)g^{-1}\xi(f),$$

which implies that

(1.13) $$\chi(fg) = g^{-1}\chi(f)g;$$

i.e., $\chi$ transforms by a similarity transformation. Conversely, any assignment of a matrix of $p$-forms $\chi(f)$ to a given frame $f$ which is defined for all frames and satisfies (1.13) defines an element $\chi \in \mathcal{E}^p(X, \text{Hom}(E, E))$, as is easy to verify.

Returning to the problem of defining the curvature, let $E \longrightarrow X$ be a vector bundle with a connection $D$ and let $\theta(f) = \theta(D, f)$ be the associated connection matrix. We define

(1.14) $$\Theta(D, f) = d\theta(f) + \theta(f) \wedge \theta(f),$$

which is an $r \times r$ matrix of 2-forms; i.e.,

$$\Theta_{\rho\sigma} = d\theta

then

$$D(e'_\sigma) = \sum_v \theta_{v\sigma}(fg)e'_v$$

$$= \sum_{v,\rho} \theta_{v\sigma}(fg)g_{\rho v}e_\rho,$$

and, on the other hand,

$$D\left(\sum_\rho g_{\rho\sigma}e_\rho\right) = \sum_\rho dg_{\rho\sigma}e_\rho + \sum_{\rho,\tau} g_{\rho\sigma}\theta_{\tau\rho}e_\tau.$$

By comparing coefficients, we obtain

(1.15) $$g\theta(fg) = dg + \theta(f)g.$$

(b) Take the exterior derivative of the matrix equation (1.15), obtaining

(1.16) $$d\theta(f) \cdot g - \theta(f) \cdot dg = dg \cdot \theta(fg) + g \cdot d\theta(fg).$$

Also,

(1.17) $$\theta(fg) = g^{-1}dg + g^{-1}\theta(f)g,$$

and thus we obtain by substituting (1.17) into (1.16) an algebraic expression for $gd\theta(fg)$ in terms of the quantities $d\theta(f), \theta(f), dg, g,$ and $g^{-1}$. Then we can write

(1.18) $$g[d\theta(fg) + \theta(fg) \wedge \theta(fg)]$$

in terms of these same quantities. Writing this out and simplifying, we find that (1.18) is the same as

$$[d\theta(f) + \theta(f) \wedge \theta(f)]g,$$

which proves part (b).

Q.E.D.

Lemma 1.7: $$[d + \theta(f)][d + \theta(f)]\xi(f) = \Theta(f)\xi(f).$$

Proof: By straightforward computation we have (deleting the notational dependence on $f$)

$$(d + \theta)(d + \theta)\xi = d^2\xi + \theta \cdot d\xi + d(\theta \cdot \xi) + \theta \wedge \theta

that the C-linear mapping

$$\Theta : \mathcal{E}(X, E) \longrightarrow \mathcal{E}^2(X, E)$$

has the representation with respect to a frame

$$\Theta(f) = \Theta(D, f) = d\theta(f) + \theta(f) \wedge \theta(f).$$

We see by Lemma 1.6(b) that $\Theta_E(D)$ is well defined, since $\Theta(D, f)$ satisfies the transformation property (1.13), which ensures that $\Theta(D, f)$ determines a global element in $\mathcal{E}^2(X, \text{Hom}(E, E))$.

Remark: It follows from the local definition of $\Theta_E(D)$ that the curvature is an $\mathcal{E}(X)$-linear mapping

$$\Theta : \mathcal{E}(X, E) \longrightarrow \mathcal{E}^2(X, E),$$

and it is this linearity property that makes $\Theta$ into a tensor in the classical sense. Note that the transformation formula for $\theta(f)$ involves derivatives of the change of frames and that of course the connection $D$ is not $\mathcal{E}(X)$-linear. If we denote by $D_z\xi$ the natural contraction of $Z \otimes D\xi$ for $Z \in T(X)$ and $\xi \in \mathcal{E}(X, E)$, then the classical curvature tensor $R(Z, W) = D_Z D_W - D_W D_Z - D_{[Z, W]}$ defined from this affine connection agrees with $\Theta(Z, W) \in \mathcal{E}(X, \text{Hom}(E, E))$. This follows by an exterior algebra computation and (1.14), since for a frame $f$ over $U$, $D\xi(f) = d\xi(f) + \theta(f) \wedge \xi(f)$ implies

$$D_Z\xi(f) = Z\xi(f) + \theta(f)(Z)\xi(f).$$

We can now define the action of $D$ on higher-order differential forms by setting

$$D\xi(f) = d\xi(f) + \theta(f) \wedge \xi(f),

The only unproved part is for $p > 0$, but we observe that Lemma 1.7 is still valid in this case. Then the curvature is the obstruction to $D^2 = 0$ and is therefore the obstruction that the sequence

$$\mathcal{E}(X, E) \xrightarrow{D} \mathcal{E}^1(X, E) \xrightarrow{D} \mathcal{E}^2(X, E) \longrightarrow \cdots \longrightarrow$$

be a complex (cf. Sec. 5 in Chap. IV).

The differential forms $\mathcal{E}^p(X, \text{Hom}(E, E))$ are locally matrices of $p$-forms. We want to use this fact to define a Lie product on the algebra

$$\mathcal{E}^*(X, \text{Hom}(E, E)) = \sum_p \mathcal{E}^p(X, \text{Hom}(E, E)).$$

We proceed as follows. If $\chi \in \mathcal{E}^p(X, \text{Hom}(E, E))$ and $f$ is a frame for $E$ over the open set $U$, then we have seen before that

$$\chi(f) \in \mathfrak{M}_r \otimes_{\mathbb{C}} \mathcal{E}^p(U),$$

and thus if $\psi \in \mathcal{E}^q(X, \text{Hom}(E, E))$, we define

(1.19) $$[\chi(f), \psi(f)] = \chi(f) \wedge \psi(f) - (-1)^{pq} \psi(f) \wedge \chi(f),$$

where the right-hand side is matrix multiplication. If $g$ is a change of frame, then by (1.13) we have

$$\chi(fg) = g^{-1}\chi(f)g$$

$$\psi(fg) = g^{-1}\psi(f)g,$$

and thus

$$[\chi(fg), \psi(fg)] = g^{-1}[\chi(f), \psi(f)]g$$

by a straightforward substitution. Therefore the Lie bracket is well defined on $\mathcal{E}^*(\chi, \text{Hom}(E,

We now want to show that any differentiable vector bundle admits a connection. In the next section we shall see some examples when we look at the special case of holomorphic vector bundles. Assume that $E$ is a Hermitian vector bundle over $X$. Then we can extend the metric $h$ on $E$ in a natural manner to act on $E$-valued covectors. Namely, set

(1.20) $\langle \omega \otimes \xi, \omega' \otimes \xi' \rangle_x = \omega \wedge \bar{\omega}' \langle \xi, \xi' \rangle_x$

for $\omega \in \wedge^p T_x^*(X), \omega' \in \wedge^q T_x^*(X)$, and $\xi, \xi' \in E$, for $x \in X$. Thus the extension of the inner product to differential forms induces a mapping

$$h : \mathcal{E}^p(X, E) \otimes \mathcal{E}^q(X, E) \longrightarrow \mathcal{E}^{p+q}(X).$$

A connection $D$ on $E$ is said to be compatible with a Hermitian metric $h$ on $E$ if

(1.21) $d\langle \xi, \eta \rangle = \langle D\xi, \eta \rangle + \langle \xi, D\eta \rangle.$

Suppose that $f = (e_1, \ldots, e_r)$ is any frame and that $D$ is a connection compatible with a Hermitian metric on $E$. Then we see that [letting $h(f) = h$, $\theta(f) = \theta$]

$$dh_{\rho\sigma} = d\langle e_\sigma, e_\rho \rangle = \langle De_\sigma, e_\rho \rangle + \langle e_\sigma, De_\rho \rangle$$

$$= \left\langle \sum_\tau \theta_{\tau\sigma} e_\tau, e_\rho \right\rangle + \langle e_\sigma, \sum_\mu \theta_{\mu\rho} e_\mu \rangle$$

$$= \sum_\tau \theta_{\

for a unitary frame; i.e., $\theta$ is to be skew-Hermitian. In each $U_{\alpha}$ we can choose the trivial skew-Hermitian matrix of the form $\theta_{\alpha} = 0$; i.e., $\theta(f_{\alpha}) = 0$. If we make a change of frame in $U_{\alpha}$, then we see that we require that

(1.23) $$\theta(f_{\alpha}g) = g^{-1}dg + 0$$

by Lemma 1.6(a). Therefore, define $\theta(f_{\alpha}g)$ by (1.23), and noting that $h(f_{\alpha}g) = {}^t\bar{g}h(f)g = {}^t\bar{g}g$, we obtain

$$dh(f_{\alpha}g) = d({}^t\bar{g} \cdot g)$$

$$= d{}^t\bar{g} \cdot g + {}^t\bar{g} \cdot dg$$

$$= d{}^t\bar{g}({}^t\bar{g})^{-1} \cdot {}^t\bar{g} \cdot g + {}^t\bar{g} \cdot g \cdot g^{-1} \cdot dg$$

$$= {}^t\bar{\theta}(f_{\alpha}g)h(f_{\alpha}g) + h(f_{\alpha}g)\theta(f_{\alpha}g),$$

which verifies the compatibility. Let $\{\varphi_{\alpha}\}$ be a partition of unity subordinate to $\{U_{\alpha}\}$ and let $D_{\alpha}$ be the connection in $E|_{U_{\alpha}}$ defined by

$$(D_{\alpha}\xi)(f_{\alpha}) = d\xi(f_{\alpha}).$$

$D_{\alpha}$ is defined with respect to other frames over $U_{\alpha}$ by formula (1.23) and is compatible with the Hermitian metric on $E|_{U_{\alpha}}$, by construction. Then we let $D = \sum_{\alpha} \varphi_{\alpha}D_{\alpha}$, which is a well-defined (first-order partial-differential) operator

$$D : \mathcal{E}(X, E) \longrightarrow \mathcal{E}^{1}(X

Suppose then that we have a connection on $E$
$$D : \mathcal{E}(X, E) \longrightarrow \mathcal{E}^{1}(X, E) = \mathcal{E}^{1,0}(X, E) \oplus \mathcal{E}^{0,1}(X, E).$$

Then $D$ splits naturally into $D = D' + D''$, where
$$D' : \mathcal{E}(X, E) \longrightarrow \mathcal{E}^{1,0}(X, E)$$
$$D'' : \mathcal{E}(X, E) \longrightarrow \mathcal{E}^{0,1}(X, E).$$

**Theorem 2.1:** If $h$ is a Hermitian metric on a holomorphic vector bundle $E \longrightarrow X$, then $h$ induces canonically a connection, $D(h)$, on $E$ which satisfies, for $W$ an open set in $X$,

(a) For $\xi, \eta \in \mathcal{E}(W, E)$
$$d\langle \xi, \eta \rangle = \langle D\xi, \eta \rangle + \langle \xi, D\eta \rangle;$$

i.e., $D$ is compatible with the metric $h$.

(b) If $\xi \in \mathcal{O}(W, E)$, i.e., is a holomorphic section of $E$, then $D''\xi = 0$.

**Proof:** First, we point out that (b) is equivalent to the fact that the connection matrix $\theta(f)$ is of type (1,0) for a holomorphic frame $f$. This follows, since for $\xi \in \mathcal{O}(W, E)$ and $f$ a holomorphic frame, we have
$$D\xi(f) = (d + \theta(f))\xi(f)$$
$$= (\partial + \theta^{(1,0)}(f))\xi(f) + (\bar{\partial} + \theta^{(0,1)}(f))\xi(f),$$

where $\theta = \theta^{(1,0)} + \theta^{(0,1)}$ is the natural decomposition. Therefore
$$D'\xi(f

We can then define $\theta$ by (2.1). Such a connection matrix clearly satisfies (a) and (b). Moreover, if $f' = fg$ is another holomorphic frame, we have

$$h(fg) = {}^t \bar{g} h(f)g,$$

so that

$$h^{-1}(fg) = g^{-1}h(f)^{-1}[{}^t \bar{g}]^{-1}$$

and

$$g\theta(fg) = g[h^{-1}(fg)\partial h(fg)]$$

$$= h(f)^{-1}[{}^t \bar{g}]^{-1}\partial[{}^t \bar{g} h(f)g]$$

$$= h(f)^{-1}[{}^t \bar{g}]^{-1}[{}^t \bar{g}\partial h(f)g + {}^t \bar{g} h(f)\partial g + {}^t \bar{g} h(f)g].$$

But $g$ is a holomorphic change of frame, from which it follows that

$$\partial^t \bar{g} = \overline{\partial^t g} = 0 \quad \text{and} \quad \partial g = dg.$$

Thus

$$g\theta(fg) = h(f)^{-1}\partial h(f)g + dg$$

$$= \theta(f)g + dg.$$

Recalling Lemma 1.6(a), we see that this is the necessary transformation formula for $\theta$ to define a global connection.

Q.E.D.

This theorem gives a simple formula for the canonical connection in terms of the metric $h$; namely,

(2.2) $$\theta(f) = h(f)^{-1}\partial h(f)$$

for a holomorphic frame $f$. Moreover, $D = D' + D''$ has the following representation with respect to a holomorphic frame $f$:

$$D' = \partial + \theta(f)$$

(2.3) $$D'' = \bar{\partial}.$$

Thus we have the following proposition.

**Proposition 2.2:** Let $D$ be the canonical connection of a Hermitian holomorphic vector bundle $E \longrightarrow X$, with Hermitian

we see that

$$\partial \theta = \partial(h^{-1} \partial h) = -h^{-1} \cdot \partial h \cdot h^{-1} \wedge \partial h$$

$$= -(h^{-1} \partial h) \wedge (h^{-1} \partial h) = -\theta \wedge \theta,$$

which gives us part (a). Part (b) is a simple computation, namely,

$$\Theta = d\theta + \theta \wedge \theta = \partial \theta + \theta \wedge \theta + \bar{\partial} \theta$$

$$= \bar{\partial} \theta,$$

by using part (a). Part (c) then follows from

$$\bar{\partial} \Theta = \bar{\partial}^2 \theta = 0$$

and Proposition 1.10.

Q.E.D.

Let $E \rightarrow X$ be a holomorphic vector bundle and let $f = (e_1, \ldots, e_r)$ be a frame for $E$ defined near a point $p \in X$. Choose local coordinates $z = (z_1, \ldots, z_n)$ near $p$ so that $p$ is given by $z = 0$. Then we can write

$$f(z) = (e_1(z), \ldots, e_r(z))$$

to denote the dependence on the variable $z$ near $z = 0$. Suppose that $h$ is a Hermitian metric on $E \rightarrow X$ and that $f(z)$ is the above frame. Then we write

$$h(z) = h(f(z))$$

near $z = 0$. The next lemma tells us that we may always find a local frame $f$ near $p$ such that $h(f(z))$ has a very nice form. Let $\Theta(z) = \Theta(f(z))$.

Lemma 2.3: There exists a holomorphic frame $f$ such that

(a) $h(z) = I + O(|z|^2)$.

(b) $\Theta(0) = \bar{\partial} \partial h(0)$.

Proof: Suppose that (a) holds. Then it follows that

$$h^{-1

Assume now that $h(z)$ is given satisfying (2.4). We want to consider a change of frame of the form

$$g = I + A(z),$$

where $A(z) = \left( \sum_j A_{\rho\sigma}^j z_j \right)$ is a matrix of linear holomorphic functions of $z$. Since $A(0) = 0$, this change of frame will preserve (2.4). By choosing $A(z)$ such that

(2.5) $$\tilde{h}(z) = g(z)^* h(z) g(z) = I + O(|z|^2),$$

we will have proved (a). But (2.5) is equivalent, by Taylor’s theorem, to the vanishing of the first derivatives of (2.5) at $z = 0$; i.e., $d\tilde{h}(0) = 0$. Thus we compute

$$d\tilde{h}(z) = dh(z) + dA^*(z) \cdot h(z)$$

$$+ h(z) dA(z) + O(|z|).$$

Therefore

$$d\tilde{h}(0) = \partial h(0) + dA(0) + \bar{\partial} h(0) + dA^*(0).$$

Suppose that we let

(2.6) $$A_{\rho\sigma}^i = \frac{-\partial h_{\rho\sigma}(0)}{\partial z_i},$$

Then we see that

$$dA(0) = -\partial h(0),$$

which implies that

$$dA^*(0) = -\bar{\partial} h(0).$$

Then the choice of $A(z)$ given by (2.6), depending on the derivatives of the metric $h$, ensures that (2.5) holds.

Q.E.D.

This lemma allows us to compute the curvature $\Theta$ at a particular point without having to compute the inverse of the local representation for the metric, provided that we have the right frame.

We want to give one principal example concerning the computation of connections and curvatures. Further examples of specific Hermitian metrics on tangent bundles are found in Chap. VI, where we shall discuss Kähler manifolds. In Sec. 4 we shall

so that $e_1 \wedge \ldots \wedge e_r \neq 0$. Thus $f = (e_1, \ldots, e_r)$ can be thought of as an $n \times r$ matrix with coefficients being smooth functions in $U$ and whose columns are the vectors $\{e_j\}$, and the matrix $f$ is of maximal rank at each point $z \in U$. A holomorphic frame will simply have holomorphic coefficients. We define a metric on $U_{r,n}$ by letting

(2.7) $h(f) = {}^t \bar{f} f$

for any frame $f$ for $U_{r,n}$. This metric results from considering $U_{r,n} \subset G_{r,n} \times \mathbf{C}^n$ and restricting the standard Hermitian metric on $\mathbf{C}^n$ to the fibres of $U_{r,n} \longrightarrow G_{r,n}$. First we note that $h(f)$ is positive definite since (recall that $f$ has maximal rank)

$${}^t \bar{z} h(f)z = {}^t (\bar{f}z)(fz) = |fz|^2 > 0 \quad \text{if } z \neq 0.$$

Moreover, if $g$ is a change of frame, then we compute that

$$h(fg) = {}^t (\bar{fg})(fg) = {}^t \bar{g}^t \bar{f}fg = {}^t \bar{g}h(f)g,$$

so that (1.7) is satisfied, and thus we see that $h$ defined by (2.7) on frames gives a well-defined Hermitian metric on $U_{r,n}$, since the frame representation transforms correctly.

We can now compute the canonical connection and curvature for $U_{r,n}$ with respect to this natural metric. If $f$ is any holomorphic frame for $U_{r,n}$, then by (2.2) and Proposition 2.2, we see that

$$\theta(f) = h^{-1}(f)\partial h(f)$$

$$\Theta(f) = \bar{\partial}(h^{-

where $\xi_j \in \mathcal{O}(U)$ and $\sum |\xi_j|^2 = |f|^2 \neq 0$, then

$$df = \begin{bmatrix} d\xi_1 \\ \cdot \\ \cdot \\ d\xi_n \end{bmatrix}, \quad \begin{align*}
t df &= (\bar{d}\xi_1, \ldots, \bar{d}\xi_n) \\
&= (d\bar{\xi}_1, \ldots, d\bar{\xi}_n),
\end{align*}$$

and we obtain

$$\Theta(f) = - \frac{|f|^2 \sum_{i=1}^{n} d\xi_i \wedge d\bar{\xi}_i - \sum_{i,j=1}^{n} \bar{\xi}_i \xi_j d\xi_i \wedge d\bar{\xi}_j}{|f|^4}.$$

Recall that the functions $\xi_1, \ldots, \xi_n$ are functions of the local coordinates on $G_{1,n} = \mathbf{P}_{n-1}$, and that, in particular, $\Theta(f)$ is a well-defined 2-form on $U \subset \mathbf{P}_{n-1}$. Alternatively, we can think of $(\xi_1, \ldots, \xi_n)$ as being homogeneous coordinates for $\mathbf{P}_{n-1}$, and by the homogeneity of (2.9), we see that the expression in (2.9) induces a well-defined 2-form on all of $\mathbf{P}_{n-1}$, which agrees with the 2-form on $U$ mentioned above. We shall see this differential form again when we study Kähler metrics in Chap. V.

Returning to the general case of $U_{r,n} \rightarrow G_{r,n}$, we have seen in Lemma 2.3 that, by a proper choice of holomorphic frame for $U_{r,n}$ and a proper choice of local holomorphic coordinates near some fixed point, we can find a very simple expression for the curvature. We shall now see an example of this.

Let

$$f_0 = \begin{bmatrix} I_r \\ 0 \end{

Moreover, $U(n)$, the unitary group, is transitive on $G_{r,n}$ under this action (a well-known fact of linear algebra).

Therefore if $y_0$ is any point in $G_{r,n}$ and $y_0 = u(x_0)$ for a unitary matrix $u$, then the mapping

$$Z \rightarrow u \begin{bmatrix} I \\ Z \end{bmatrix}$$

gives local coordinates at $y_0 \in G_{r,n}$. The metric at $y_0$ has the form, with respect to the frame

$$f(z) = u \begin{bmatrix} I \\ Z \end{bmatrix},$$

$$h(Z) = h(f(Z)) = \left( u \begin{bmatrix} I \\ Z \end{bmatrix} \right)^* \left( u \begin{bmatrix} I \\ Z \end{bmatrix} \right)$$

$$= I + Z^* Z$$

$$= I + O(|Z|^2),$$

which is the form occurring in Lemma 2.3(a) (note that the dependence on $u$ disappears completely). Thus we see that

$$\Theta(y_0) = \Theta(0) = \bar{\partial} \partial (I + Z^* Z)(0)$$

(2.11)

$$\Theta(y_0) = dZ^* \wedge dZ(0)$$

which is the same for all points of $G_{r,n}$ with respect to these particular systems of local coordinates. We shall use this expression for the curvature to compute certain Chern classes of this vector bundle in the next section.

3. Chern Classes of Differentiable Vector Bundles

Our object in this section is to give a differential-geometric derivation of the Chern classes of a differentiable C-vector bundle $E \rightarrow X$. The Chern classes will turn out to be the primary obstruction to admitting global frames, or, more generally, admitting $k$ global sections $\xi_1, \ldots, \xi_k, 1 \leq k \leq \text{rank } C E$, such that $\xi_1 \wedge \ldots \wedge \xi_k \neq 0

is said to be invariant if

$$\tilde{\varphi}(g A_1 g^{-1}, \ldots, g A_k g^{-1}) = \tilde{\varphi}(A_1, \ldots, A_k)$$

for $g \in GL(r, \mathbf{C})$, $A_i \in \mathfrak{M}_r$. Let $\tilde{I}_k(\mathfrak{M}_r)$ be the C-vector space of all invariant $k$-linear forms on $\mathfrak{M}_r$.

Suppose that $\tilde{\varphi} \in \tilde{I}_k(\mathfrak{M}_r)$. Then $\tilde{\varphi}$ induces

$$\varphi : \mathfrak{M}_r \longrightarrow \mathbf{C}$$

by setting

$$\varphi(A) = \tilde{\varphi}(A, \ldots, A).$$

It is clear then that $\varphi$ is a homogeneous polynomial of degree $k$ in the entries of $A$. Moreover, for $g \in GL(r, \mathbf{C})$,

$$\varphi(g A g^{-1}) = \varphi(A),$$

and we say then that $\varphi$ is invariant. Let $I_k(\mathfrak{M}_r)$ be the set of invariant homogeneous polynomials of degree $k$ as above. Since the isomorphism of the symmetric tensor algebra $S(\mathfrak{M}_r^*)$ and the polynomials on $\mathfrak{M}_r$ preserves degrees (see Sternberg [1]), one obtains† from $\varphi \in I_k(\mathfrak{M}_r)$ an element $\tilde{\varphi} \in \tilde{I}_k(\mathfrak{M}_r)$ such that

$$\tilde{\varphi}(A, \ldots, A) = \varphi(A).$$

We shall omit the tilde and use the same symbol for the multilinear form and its restriction to the diagonal.

**Example 3.1:** The usual determinant of an $r \times r$ matrix is a mapping

$$\det : \mathfrak{M}_r \longrightarrow \mathbf{C},$$

which is clearly a member of $I_r(\mathfrak

We can check that this definition is independent of the choice of frame. Namely, if $g$ is a change of frame, then by (1.13)

$$\varphi_U(\xi_1(fg), \ldots, \xi_k(fg)) = \varphi_U(g^{-1}\xi_1(f)g, \ldots, g^{-1}\xi_k(f)g)$$

$$= \varphi_U(\xi_1(f), \ldots, \xi_k(f)),$$

by the invariance of $\varphi$ and the induced invariance of $\varphi$ when acting on matrices with differential form coefficients. Thus we get an extension of $\varphi$ to all of $X$,

$$\varphi_x : \mathcal{E}^p(X, \text{Hom}(E, E)) \times \cdots \times \mathcal{E}^p(X, \text{Hom}(E, E)) \rightarrow \mathcal{E}^{pk}(X),$$

which when restricted to the diagonal induces the action of the invariant polynomial $\varphi \in I_k(\mathfrak{M}_r)$ on $\mathcal{E}^p(X, \text{Hom}(E, E))$, which we denote by

$$\varphi_X : \mathcal{E}^p(X, \text{Hom}(E, E)) \longrightarrow \mathcal{E}^{pk}(X).$$

Now suppose that we have a connection

$$D : \mathcal{E}(X, E) \longrightarrow \mathcal{E}^1(X, E)$$

defined on $E \rightarrow X$. Then we have the curvature $\Theta_E(D)$, as defined in Definition 1.8. So if $\varphi \in I_k(\mathfrak{M}_r)$, $\varphi_x(\Theta_E(D))$ is a global 2k-form on $X$. We can now state the following basic result due to A. Weil (cf. Bott and Chern [1]).

**Theorem 3.2:** Let $E \rightarrow X$ be a differentiable C-vector bundle, let $D$ be a connection on $E$, and suppose that $\varphi \in I_k(\mathfrak{M}_r)$. Then

(a) $\varphi_X(\Theta_E(D))$ is

for $A_{\alpha} \in \mathfrak{M}_r \otimes \mathcal{E}^{p_{\alpha}}(U)$, where $g(\alpha) = \sum_{\beta < \alpha} \deg A_{\beta}$. We want to show that $d\varphi_x(\Theta) = 0$, and it suffices to show that for a frame $f$ over $U$,

$$d\varphi_U(\Theta(f)) = 0.$$

But from equation (3.3) we have [letting $\Theta(f) = \Theta$]

$$d\varphi_U(\Theta) = d\varphi_U(\Theta, \ldots, \Theta) = \sum \varphi_U(\Theta, \ldots, d\Theta, \ldots, \Theta),$$

noting that $\deg \Theta$ is even. From Proposition 1.10 we have that

$$d\varphi_U(\Theta) = \sum \varphi_U(\Theta, \ldots, [\Theta, \theta], \ldots, \Theta),$$

but this vanishes by equation (3.2), and thus $\varphi_X(\Theta_E)$ is a closed form.

Now all that remains is to show that the invariance of $\varphi$ implies equation (3.1). First, if $f(t)$ and $g(t)$ are power series with matrix coefficients which converge for all $t \in \mathbf{C}$, i.e.,

$$f(t) = \sum_n A_n t^n \quad \text{and} \quad g(t) = \sum_n B_n t^n,$$

then

$$f(t)g(t) = A_0B_0 + (A_1B_0 + A_0B_1)t + O(|t|^2),$$

and if $\varphi$ is a linear functional on $\mathfrak{M}_r$, then

$$\varphi(f(t)) = \sum_n \varphi(A_n)t^n.$$

Now for $A, B \in \mathfrak{M}_r$ it follows from the above remarks that

(3.4) $$e^{-tB}Ae^{tB} - A = t[A, B] + O(|t|^

Now that $\varphi_X(\Theta_E(D))$ is closed, it makes sense to consider its image in the de Rham group $H^{2k}(X, \mathbb{C})$. To prove part (b), we shall show that for two connections $D_1, D_2$ on $E \rightarrow X$ there is a differential form $\alpha$ so that

(3.5) $$\varphi(\Theta_E(D_1)) - \varphi(\Theta_E(D_2)) = d\alpha.$$

To do this, we need to consider one-parameter families of differential forms on $X$ and one-parameter families of connections on $E \rightarrow X$, and to point out some of their properties.

Let $\alpha(t)$ be a $C^\infty$ one-parameter family of differential forms on $X, t \in \mathbb{R}$; i.e., $\alpha$ has the local representation

$$\alpha(t) = \sum a_I(x, t)dx_I$$

for $t \in \mathbb{R}$ and $a_I$ is $C^\infty$ in $x$ and $t$ (cf. Sec. 2 in Chap. I). Define locally

$$\dot{\alpha}(t) = \frac{\partial \alpha(t)}{\partial t} = \sum \frac{\partial a_I}{\partial t}dx_I$$

$$\int_a^b \alpha(t)dt = \sum \left( \int_a^b a_I(x, t)dt \right)dx_I$$

It is easy to check that these definitions are independent of the local coordinates used and that $\dot{\alpha}(t)$ and $\int_a^b \alpha(t)dt$ are well-defined global differential forms. Also,

$$\frac{\partial}{\partial t} (\alpha(t) \wedge \beta(t)) = \frac{\partial \alpha}{\partial t}(t) \wedge \beta(t) + \alpha(t) \wedge \frac{\partial \beta}{\partial t}(t)$$

and

$$\int_a^b \dot{\alpha}(t)dt = \alpha(t)|_a^b = \alpha(b) - \alpha(a).$$

For a differentiable vector bundle $E \rightarrow X$, we define a $C^\infty$ one-parameter family of connections on $E$

by

$$\dot{D}_{t0}(\xi) = \frac{\partial}{\partial t} D_t \xi |_{t0}.$$

Moreover, this mapping is $\mathcal{E}_X$-linear. Therefore $\dot{D}_{t0}$ defines an element of $\mathcal{E}^1(X, \text{Hom}(E, E))$ which we also call $\dot{D}_{t0}$. As we pointed out above, $\dot{D}_{t0}$ has a local representation

$$\dot{\theta}_{t0}(f) := \dot{D}_{t0}(f) = \frac{\partial}{\partial t} \theta_t(f) |_{t0}.$$

We can now reduce the proof of part (b) to the following lemma, which will be proved below.

**Lemma 3.3:** Let $D_t$ be a $C^\infty$ one-parameter family of connections, and for each $t \in \mathbf{R}$, let $\Theta_t$ be the induced curvature. Then for any $\varphi \in I_k(\mathfrak{M}_r)$,

$$\varphi_X(\Theta_b) - \varphi_X(\Theta_a) = d \left( \int_a^b \varphi'(\Theta_t; \dot{D}_t) dt \right),$$

where

$$\varphi'(\xi; \eta) = \sum_{\alpha} \varphi(\xi, \xi, \ldots, \xi, \eta, \xi, \ldots, \xi),$$

$(\alpha)$ denotes the $\alpha$th argument, and $\xi, \eta \in \mathcal{E}^*(X, \text{Hom}(E, E))$.

Namely, if $D_1$ and $D_2$ are two given connections, for $E \longrightarrow X$, then let

$$D_t = tD_1 + (1-t)D_2,$$

which is clearly a $C^\infty$ one-parameter family of connections on $E$. Thus, by Lemma 3.3, we see that

$$\varphi_X(\Theta_E(D_1)) - \varphi_X(\Theta_E(D_2)) = \varphi_X(\Theta_1) - \varphi_X

By adding and subtracting

$$\sum_{\alpha} \varphi_U(\Theta, \ldots, [\dot{\theta}_{(\alpha)}, \theta], \ldots, \Theta)$$

to/from the above equation and noting that

$$\dot{\Theta} = d\dot{\theta} + [\dot{\theta}, \theta] \quad \text{(differentiation of (1.14))}$$

$$d\Theta = [\Theta, \theta] \quad \text{(Bianchi identity, Proposition 1.10)},$$

we obtain the equation

$$d\varphi'_U(\Theta; \dot{\theta}) = \sum_{\alpha} \varphi_U(\Theta, \ldots, \dot{\theta}_{(\alpha)}, \ldots, \Theta)$$

$$+ \sum_{\alpha} \left\{ \sum_{i < \alpha} \varphi_U(\Theta, \ldots, [\Theta, \theta]_{(i)}, \ldots, \dot{\theta}_{(\alpha)}, \ldots, \Theta) \right\}$$

$$- \varphi_U(\Theta, \ldots, [\dot{\theta}, \theta]_{(\alpha)}, \ldots, \Theta)$$

$$- \sum_{i > \alpha} \varphi_U(\Theta, \ldots, \dot{\theta}_{(\alpha)}, \ldots, [\Theta, \theta]_{(i)}, \ldots, \Theta) \right\}.$$

By (3.2), we see that the second sum over $\alpha$ vanishes, and we are left with

$$d\varphi'_U(\Theta; \dot{\theta}) = \sum_{\alpha} \varphi_U(\Theta, \ldots, \dot{\theta}_{(\alpha)}, \ldots, \Theta)$$

$$= \dot{\varphi}_U(\Theta),$$

which is (3.6).

Q.E.D.

We are now in a position to define Chern classes of a differentiable vector bundle. From Example 3.1 we consider the invariant polynomials $\Phi_k \in I_k(\mathfrak{M}_r)$ defined

E. We shall see shortly that they are indeed obstructions to finding, e.g., global frames. First we want to show that the Chern classes are real cohomology classes.

Proposition 3.5: Let $D$ be a connection on a Hermitian vector bundle $E$ compatible with the Hermitian metric $h$. Then the Chern form $c(E, D)$ is a real differential form, and it follows that $c(E) \in H^*(X, \mathbf{R})$, under the canonical inclusion $H^*(X, \mathbf{R}) \subset H^*(X, \mathbf{C})$.

Proof: It suffices to show that for a local frame $f$ the matrix representation for the Chern form is a real differential form. Therefore let $h = h(f)\Theta = \Theta(D, f)$, as usual, and recall that $D$ being compatible with the metric $h$ was equivalent to the condition (1.22),

$$dh = h\theta + t\bar{\theta}h,$$

whose exterior derivative is given by

$$0 = dh \wedge \theta + hd\theta + d^t\bar{\theta} \cdot h - t^t\bar{\theta} \wedge dh.$$

By substituting the above expression for $dh$, we obtain

(3.7) $$0 = h\Theta + t\bar{\theta}h.$$

In particular, if $f$ is a unitary frame, we note that $\Theta$ is skew-Hermitian. Using (3.7) we can show that if

$$c := c(E, D, f) = \det \left( I + \frac{i}{2\pi}\Theta \right),$$

then $c = \bar{c}$; i.e., $c$ is a real differential form. Namely,

$$\det \left( h + \frac{i}{2\pi}\Theta h \right) = \det \left( I + \frac{i}{2\pi}\Theta \right) \cdot \det h$$

$$\parallel$$

$$\det \left( h - \frac{i}{2\pi}h^t\bar{\theta} \right) = \det h \

and $c = [\varphi]$ and $c' = [\varphi']$, then

$$c \cdot c' = [\varphi \wedge \varphi']$$

which is easily checked to be well defined.†

**Theorem 3.6:** Suppose that $E$ and $E'$ are differentiable C-vector bundles over a differentiable manifold $X$. Then

(a) If $\varphi : Y \longrightarrow X$ is a differentiable mapping where $Y$ is a differentiable manifold, then

$$c(\varphi^* E) = \varphi^* c(E),$$

where $\varphi^* E$ is the pullback vector bundle and $\varphi^* c(E)$ is the pullback of the cohomology class $c(E)$.

(b) $c(E \oplus E') = c(E) \cdot c(E')$, where the product is in the de Rham cohomology ring $H^*(X, \mathbf{R})$.

(c) $c(E)$ depends only on the isomorphism class of the vector bundle $E$.

(d) If $E^*$ is the dual vector bundle to $E$, then

$$c_j(E^*) = (-1)^j c_j(E).$$

**Proof:**

(a) Let $D$ be any connection on $E \longrightarrow X$. To prove part (a), it will suffice to define a connection $D^*$ on $\varphi^* E$ so that

$$\varphi^*(\Theta(D)) = \Theta(D^*),$$

where $\varphi^*$ is the induced map on curvature. We proceed as follows. Suppose that $f = (e_1, \ldots, e_r)$ is a frame over $U$ in $X$. Then $f^* = \left(e_1^*, \ldots, e_r^*\right)$, where $e_i^* = e_i \circ \varphi$, is a frame for $\varphi^* E$ over $\varphi^{-1}(U)$, and frames of the form $f^*$ cover $Y$. Also, if $g : U \longrightarrow GL(r, \mathbf{C})$ is a change of frame over $U$, then $g^* = g \circ \

(b) Given $D$ and $D'$, connections on $E$ and $E'$, respectively, it suffices to find a connection $D^{\oplus}$ on $E \oplus E'$ so that

$$c(E \oplus E', D^{\oplus}) = c(E, D) \wedge c(E', D')$$

Also, as in part (a), it suffices to consider a local argument. Therefore for $\theta$ and $\theta'$ connection matrices over $U$ on $E$ and $E'$, respectively, it is easy to see that

$$\theta^{\oplus} = \begin{bmatrix} \theta & 0 \\ 0 & \theta' \end{bmatrix}$$

is a connection matrix defining a global connection on $E \oplus E'$ (the details are left to the reader). The associated curvature matrix is given by

$$\Theta^{\oplus} = \begin{bmatrix} \Theta & 0 \\ 0 & \Theta' \end{bmatrix}.$$

Thus

$$c(E \oplus E', D^{\oplus})|_U = \det \begin{bmatrix} I + \frac{i}{2\pi} \Theta & 0 \\ 0 & I' + \frac{i}{2\pi} \Theta' \end{bmatrix}$$

$$= \det \begin{bmatrix} I + \frac{i}{2\pi} \Theta \end{bmatrix} \det \begin{bmatrix} I' + \frac{i}{2\pi} \Theta' \end{bmatrix}$$

$$= c(E, D)|_U \wedge c(E', D')|_U.$$

(c) Suppose that $\alpha : E \longrightarrow E'$ is a vector bundle isomorphism. Then we want to show that $c(E) = c(E')$. This is simple, and similar to the argument in part (a). Let $D$ be a connection on $E$, and define a connection $D'$ on $E'$ by defining the connection matrix for $D'$ by the relation

$$\theta'(f') = \theta(f),$$

where $f$ is a frame for $E$ and $f' = (\

to see that $\theta^*$ is a well-defined connection on $E^*$. But (3.9) holds if and only if

$$-^t \theta(fg) = {}^t gd^t(g^{-1}) - {}^t g^t \theta(f)^t(g^{-1}),$$

which simplifies to, after taking transposes and using the fact that $dg^{-1} = -g^{-1}dgg^{-1},$

$$\theta(fg) = g^{-1}dg + g^{-1}\theta(f)g,$$

which holds, since $\theta(f)$ is a connection matrix. Therefore the curvature for $E^*$ is

$$\Theta^* = d\theta^* + \theta^* \wedge \theta^*$$

$$= -d^t \theta + {}^t \theta \wedge {}^t \theta$$

$$= -d^t \theta - {}^t(\theta \wedge \theta)$$

$$= -^t(d\theta + \theta \wedge \theta)$$

$$= -^t\Theta.$$

Thus the Chern forms restricted to $U$ are related by

$$c_k(E^*, D^*) = \Phi_k \left( -\frac{i}{2\pi} \Theta \right)$$

$$= (-1)^k \Phi_k \left( \frac{i}{2\pi} \Theta \right)$$

$$= (-1)^k c_k(E, D),$$

where we note that the invariant polynomial $\Phi_k$ is homogeneous of degree $k$ and is invariant with respect to transpose (since det is).

Q.E.D.

Remark: In the case where $E \longrightarrow X$ is a holomorphic vector bundle and $h$ is a Hermitian matrix on $E, h^*$, the induced metric on $E^*$, is given by

$$h^*(f^*) = {}^t(h^{-1}(f)),$$

where $f$ and $f^*$ are dual holomorphic frames. From this we see that

$$\theta^* = (h^*)^{-1} \partial h^*$$

$$= {}^t h \partial

(a) $c_0(E) = 1$.
(b) If $E \cong X \times \mathbf{C}^r$ is trivial, then $c_j(E) = 0, j = 1, \ldots, r$; i.e., $c(E) = 1$.
(c) If $E \cong E' \oplus T_s$, where $T_s$ is a trivial vector bundle of rank $s$, then
$$c_j(E) = 0, \quad j = r - s + 1, \ldots, r.$$

Proof:

(a) This is obvious from the definition of Chern classes.
(b) If $E = X \times \mathbf{C}^r$, then $\mathcal{E}(X, E) \cong (\mathcal{E}(X))^r$, and a connection
$$D : \mathcal{E}(X, E) \longrightarrow \mathcal{E}^1(X, E)$$
can be defined by
$$D\xi = d\xi = d \begin{bmatrix} \xi_1 \\ \cdot \\ \cdot \\ \xi_r \end{bmatrix},$$
where $\xi_j \in \mathcal{E}(X)$. In this case the connection matrix $\theta$ is identically zero. Then the curvature vanishes, and we have
$$c(E, D) = \det(I + 0) = 1,$$
which implies that $c_j(E, D) = 0, j > 0$.
(c) We compute
$$c(E) = c(E' \oplus T_s)$$
$$= c(E') \cdot c(T_s)$$
$$= c(E') \cdot 1$$
by Theorem 3.6 and part (b). Moreover, $E'$ is of rank $r - s$, and so we have
$$c(E) = 1 + c_1(E) + \cdots + c_r(E) = 1 + c_1(E') + \cdots + c_{r-s}(E'),$$
from which it follows that
$$c_j(E) = 0, \quad j = r - s + 1, \ldots, r.$$

Q.E.D.

We shall now use Theorem 3.7 to show

in the $z$-plane; if $w = 1/z$ is the coordinate system at infinity (from the classical point of view), $h(\partial/\partial w, \partial/\partial w)$ has the same form. We compute

$$\theta(z) = h(z)^{-1} \partial h(z)$$
$$= (1 + |z|^2)^2 \partial \left( \frac{1}{(1 + |z|^2)^2} \right)$$
$$\theta(z) = -\frac{2\bar{z}}{(1 + |z|^2)} dz$$
$$\Theta = \bar{\partial} \theta = \frac{2}{(1 + |z|^2)^2} dz \wedge d\bar{z}.$$

Therefore

$$c_1(E, h) = \frac{i}{\pi(1 + |z|^2)^2} dz \wedge d\bar{z}$$
$$= \frac{2dx \wedge dy}{\pi(1 + |z|^2)^2}.$$

Now

$$\int_{\mathbf{P}_1} c_1(E, h) = \frac{2}{\pi} \int_0^\infty \int_0^{2\pi} \frac{\rho d\rho d\theta}{(1 + \rho^2)^2}$$
$$= 4 \int_0^\infty \frac{\rho d\rho}{(1 + \rho^2)^2}$$
$$= 2 \int_1^\infty \frac{du}{u^2}$$
$$= 2.$$

Thus the closed differential form $c_1(E, h)$ cannot be exact, since its integral over the 2-cycle $\mathbf{P}_1$ is nonzero. Therefore $T(\mathbf{P}_1(\mathbf{C}))$ is a nontrivial complex line bundle. Note that the integral of the Chern class over $\mathbf{P}_1$ was in fact 2, which is the Euler characteristic of $\mathbf{P}_1$. This is true in much greater generality. Namely, the classical Gauss-Bonnet theorem asserts that the integral of the Gaussian curvature over a compact 2-manifold is the Euler characteristic (see e.g

using the notation of Example 2.4. Thus we find that $Z = (Z_{11}, Z_{12}), Z_{1j} \in \mathbf{C}$, and we have the $2 \times 2$ curvature matrix

$$dZ^* \wedge dZ = \begin{bmatrix} d\bar{Z}_{11} \wedge dZ_{11} & d\bar{Z}_{11} \wedge dZ_{12} \\ d\bar{Z}_{12} \wedge dZ_{11} & d\bar{Z}_{12} \wedge dZ_{12} \end{bmatrix}$$

from which we compute

$$c_2(E, h)(y_0) = \det \left( \frac{i}{2\pi} dZ^* \wedge dZ \right)$$

$$= \left( -\frac{1}{2\pi^2} \right) dZ_{11} \wedge d\bar{Z}_{11} \wedge dZ_{12} \wedge d\bar{Z}_{12}$$

$$= \left( -\frac{1}{2\pi^2} \right) \cdot \left( \frac{2}{i} \right)^2 dX_{11} \wedge dY_{11} \wedge dX_{12} \wedge dY_{12}$$

$$= \frac{2}{\pi^2} dX_{11} \wedge dY_{11} \wedge dX_{12} \wedge dY_{12},$$

which shows that $c_2(E, h)$ is a volume form for $G_{2,3}$ and, consequently, that

$$\int_{G_{2,3}} c_2(E, h) > 0.$$

This shows that $c_2(E, h) \neq 0$. Thus $E$ has no trivial subbundles and is itself not trivial.

4. Complex Line Bundles

In this section we are going to continue our study of Chern classes of vector bundles by restricting attention to complex line bundles, i.e., differentiable or holomorph

Let $A_i$ be the set of unordered $(i+1)$-tuples of distinct elements of the index set of $\{\varphi_\alpha\}$. Given $a \in A_i$, $a = \{\alpha_0, \ldots, \alpha_i\}$, let

$$W_{ia} = \{x \in X : \varphi_\alpha(x) < \min[\varphi_{\alpha_0}(x), \ldots, \varphi_{\alpha_i}(x)] \text{ for all } \alpha \neq \alpha_0, \ldots, \alpha_i\}.$$

Then it follows that each $W_{ia}$ is open, and $W_{ia} \cap W_{ib} = \varnothing$ if $a \neq b$. Moreover,

$$W_{ia} \subset \text{supp} \varphi_{\alpha_0} \cap \cdots \cap \text{supp} \varphi_{\alpha_i} \subset U_\alpha$$

for some $\alpha$, where $\text{supp} \varphi_{\alpha_j} = \text{support of } \varphi_{\alpha_j}$. Then we see that if we let

$$X_i = \bigcup_a W_{ia}, \quad i = 0, \ldots, n,$$

then (a) $E|_{Xi}$ is trivial and (b) $\cup X_i = X$. Assertion (a) follows from the fact that $E|_{W_{ia}}$ is trivial, since $W_{ia} \subset U_\alpha$ and $W_{ia} \cap W_{ib} = \varnothing$, $a \neq b$. If $x \in X$, then $x$ is contained in at most $n+1$ of the sets $\{U_\alpha\}$, and so at most $n+1$ of the functions $\{\varphi_\alpha\}$ are positive at $x$. Let $a = \{\alpha_0, \ldots, \alpha_i\}$, where $\varphi_{\alpha_0}, \ldots, \varphi_{\alpha_i}$ are the only functions in $\{\varphi_\alpha\}$ which are positive at $x$, $0 \leq i \leq n$. Then it follows that

$$0 = \varphi_\alpha(x) < \min\

frame, but we see that if $g$ is a change of frame, then

$$M(f^*g) = [\xi_1(f^*g), \ldots, \xi_N(f^*g)]$$

$$= [g^{-1}\xi_1(f^*), \ldots, g^{-1}\xi_N(f^*)]$$

$$= g^{-1}M(f^*).$$

Thus the rows of $M(f^*)$ and $M(f^*g)$ span the same subspace, and therefore the mapping

$$\Phi : X \longrightarrow G_{r,N}$$

is well defined at every point. It follows from the construction, by looking at local coordinates in $G_{r,N}$, that $\Phi$; is a differentiable mapping. We now claim that $\Phi^*U_{r,N} \cong E$. To see this, it suffices to define a bundle morphism $\tilde{\Phi}$

$$E \xrightarrow{\tilde{\Phi}} U_{r,N}$$

$$\downarrow$$

$$X \xrightarrow{\Phi} G_{r,N}$$

which commutes with the mapping $\Phi$ and which is injective on each fibre. We define $\tilde{\Phi}(x, v), x \in X, v \in E_x$, by setting

$$\tilde{\Phi}(x, v) = (\langle v, \xi_1(x) \rangle, \ldots, \langle v, \xi_N(x) \rangle),$$

where $\langle , \rangle$ denotes the bilinear pairing between $E$ and $E^*$. Thus $\tilde{\Phi}|_{E_x}$ is a C-linear mapping into $C^N$, and we claim that (a) $\tilde{\Phi}|_{E_x}$ is injective and (b) $\tilde{\Phi}(E_x) = \pi^{-1}(\Phi(x))$, where $\pi$ is the projection in the universal bundle. Let $f$ be a frame for $E$ near $x \in X$ and let $f^*$ be a dual frame for $E^*$; i.e., if $f = (e_1, \ldots, e_r)$ and $f^*

Proof: Since $c_1(E) = \Phi^*(c_1(U_{1,N}))$, where $\Phi$ is the mapping in Proposition 4.2, we see that it suffices to show that

$$c_1(U_{1,N} \in H^2(P_{N-1}, Z)$$

$[H^2(P_{N-1}, Z)$ has no torsion; see the discussion below]. In Sec. 2 we have computed the curvature for the canonical connection $D(h)$ associated with the natural metric $h$ on the universal bundle $U_{1,N}$, and thus, by (2.10), we see that

$$c_1(U_{1,N}, D(h)) = \frac{1}{2\pi i} \frac{|f|^2 \sum d\xi_j \wedge d\tilde{\xi}_j - \sum \tilde{\xi}_j \xi_k d\xi_j \wedge d\tilde{\xi}_k}{|f|^4},$$

where $f = (\xi_1, \ldots, \xi_N)$ is a frame for $U_{1,N}$. Now, it is well known that

$$H^q(P_n(C), Z) \cong Z, \quad q \text{ even}, \quad q \leq 2n$$

$$H^q(P_n(C), Z) \cong 0, \quad q \text{ odd}, \quad q > 2n,$$

which can be shown easily using singular cohomology (see Greenberg [1]). In fact there is a cell decomposition

$$P_0 \subset P_1 \subset \cdots \subset P_{N-1}$$

where $P_{j-1} \subset P_j$ is a linear hyperplane, and $P_j - P_{j-1} \cong C^j$. The submanifold $P_j \subset P_{N-1}$ is a generator for $H_{2j}(P_N, Z)$, and there are no torsion elements. A closed differential form $\varphi$ of degree $2j$ will be a representative of an integral cohomology class in $H^{2j}(P_{N-1}, Z)$ if and

and therefore we obtain

$$\int_{\mathbf{P}_1} \alpha = \int_{\mathbf{P}_1 \cap W} \alpha = \frac{1}{2\pi i} \int_{\mathbf{C}} \frac{dz \wedge d\bar{z}}{(1 + |z|^2)^2}$$

$$= -\frac{1}{\pi} \int_{\mathbf{R}^2} \frac{dx \wedge dy}{(1 + |z|^2)^2}$$

$$= -2 \int_0^\infty \frac{rdr}{(1 + r^2)^2}$$

$$= -1.$$

This shows that $c_1(U_{1,N}) \in H^2(\mathbf{P}_{N-1}, \mathbf{Z})$ and hence that $c_1(E) \in \tilde{H}^2(X, \mathbf{Z})$.

Q.E.D.

Remark: This approach generalizes to vector bundles. In fact, $G_{r,N}(\mathbf{C})$ has a cell decomposition similar to that given above for $G_{1,N}(\mathbf{C})$ and has non-vanishing cohomology only in even degrees and has no torsion. The generalization of the cycles $\{ \mathbf{P}_j \subset \mathbf{P}_N \}$ generating the homology are called Schubert varieties. Moreover, one can show that the Chern classes of the universal bundle $U_{r,N}$, appropriately normalized, are integral cohomology classes, and thus a version of Proposition 4.3 is valid for vector bundles (see Chern [2]). In algebraic topology, one defines the Chern classes as the pullbacks under the classifying map of the Chern classes of the universal bundle, thus admitting torsion elements. However, the proof of Theorem 3.6 in that context is considerably different and perhaps not quite so simple.

So far we have encountered two different approaches to Chern class theory: the differential-geometric definition in Sec. 3 and the classifying space approach discussed in the above remark. A third approach is to define Chern classes only for line bundles, extend the definition to direct sums of line bundles by using the required behavior on direct sums, and show that any vector bundle

Proof: We shall represent $H^1(X, \mathcal{O}^*)$ by means of Čech cohomology. Suppose that $E \rightarrow X$ is a holomorphic line bundle. There is an open covering $\{U_\alpha\} = \mathcal{U}$ and holomorphic functions

(4.4) $g_{\alpha\beta} : U_\alpha \cap U_\beta \rightarrow GL(1, \mathbf{C}) = \mathbf{C} - \{0\}$

such that

(4.5) $g_{\alpha\beta} \cdot g_{\beta\gamma} \cdot g_{\gamma\alpha} = 1$ on $U_\alpha \cap U_\beta \cap U_\gamma$.

$g_{\alpha\alpha} = 1$ on $U_\alpha$.

Namely, the $\{g_{\alpha\beta}\}$ are the transition functions of the line bundle with respect to a suitable covering (see Sec. 2 of Chap. I). But the data $\{g_{\alpha\beta}\}$ satisfying (4.5) define a cocycle $g \in Z^1(\mathcal{U}, \mathcal{O}^*)$ and hence a cohomology class in the direct limit $H^1(X, \mathcal{O}^*)$. Moreover, any line bundle $E' \rightarrow X$ which is isomorphic to $E \rightarrow X$ will correspond to the same class in $H^1(X, \mathcal{O}^*)$. This is easy to see by combining (via the isomorphism) the two sets of transition functions to get a single set of transition functions on a suitable refinement of the given $\{U_\alpha\}$ and $\{U'_\alpha\}$. Thus they will correspond to the same cohomology class. Conversely, given any cohomology class $\xi \in H^1(X, \mathcal{O}^*)$, it can be represented by a cocycle $g = \{g_{\alpha\beta}\}$ on some covering $\mathcal{U} = \{U_\alpha\}$. By means of the functions $\{g_{\alpha\beta}\}$ one can construct a holomorphic line bundle having these transition functions. Namely, let

$$\tilde{E} = \

Note that the first Chern class, as defined in Sec. 3, gives a mapping (see the dashed arrow above)

$$c_1 : H^1(X, \mathcal{O}^*) \rightarrow H^2(X, \mathbf{R}).$$

The following theorem tells us that we can compute Chern classes of line bundles by using the Bockstein operator $\delta$.

**Theorem 4.5:** The diagram

$$H^1(X, \mathcal{O}^*) \xrightarrow{\delta} H^2(X, \mathbf{Z})$$

$$\downarrow c_1$$

$$H^2(X, \mathbf{R})$$

is commutative.

**Proof:** The basic element of the proof is to represent de Rham cohomology by Čech cohomology and then compute explicitly the Bockstein operator in this context. Suppose that $\mathcal{U} = \{U_\alpha\}$ is a locally finite covering of $X$, and consider $\xi = \{\xi_{\alpha\beta\gamma}\} \in Z^2(\mathcal{U}, \mathbf{R})$. We want to associate with $\xi$ a closed 2-form $\varphi$ on $X$. Since $\xi$ also is an element of $Z^2(\mathcal{U}, \mathcal{E})$ and $\mathcal{E}$ is fine, there exists a $\tau \in C^1(\mathcal{U}, \mathcal{E})$ so that $\delta\tau = \xi$, for instance,

$$\tau_{\beta\gamma} = \sum_\alpha \varphi_\alpha \xi_{\alpha\beta\gamma},$$

where $\varphi_\alpha$ is a partition of unity subordinate to $\mathcal{U}$. Exterior differentiation is well defined on cochains in $C^q(\mathcal{U}, \mathcal{E}^p)$ and commutes with the coboundary operator, and so we obtain

$$\delta d\tau = d\delta\tau = d\xi = 0.$$

Then $d\tau \in Z^1(\mathcal{U}, \mathcal{E}^1)$, but $\mathcal{E}^1$ is also fine, so do the same thing once more, writing

$$\mu_\beta = \sum_\alpha \varphi_\alpha d\tau_{\alpha

differential-geometric definitions of Chern classes (cf. Chap. VI; Kodaira [1]; Hirzebruch [1]; Borel-Hirzebruch [1; II-Appendix]).

Suppose now that $\mathfrak{U}$ is a covering of $X$, with the property that any intersection of elements of the covering is a cell (in particular is simply connected).† We want to use $\mathfrak{U}$ to describe the Bockstein operator $\delta$:

$$\delta : H^1(X, \mathfrak{O}^*) \longrightarrow H^2(X, \mathbf{Z}).$$

Suppose that $g = \{g_{\alpha\beta}\} \in Z^1(\mathfrak{U}, \mathfrak{O}^*)$. Then $\sigma = \{\sigma_{\alpha\beta}\}$, defined by

$$\sigma_{\alpha\beta} = \frac{1}{2\pi i} \log g_{\alpha\beta} = \exp^{-1}(g_{\alpha\beta}),$$

defines an element of $C^1(\mathfrak{U}, \mathfrak{O})$ (here we use the simply connectedness and any particular branch of the logarithm). Thus $\delta\sigma \in C^2(\mathfrak{U}, \mathfrak{O})$, and since $\delta^2 = 0$, we see that $\delta\sigma \in Z^2(\mathfrak{U}, \mathfrak{O})$. But

$$(\delta\sigma)_{\alpha\beta\gamma} = \frac{1}{2\pi i} (\log g_{\beta\gamma} - \log g_{\alpha\gamma} + \log g_{\alpha\beta}),$$

and this is integer-valued, since

$$g_{\alpha\beta} \cdot g_{\beta\gamma} = g_{\alpha\gamma};$$

i.e., $\{g_{\alpha\beta}\}$ is a cocycle in $Z^1(X, \mathfrak{O}^*)$. Thus $\delta\sigma \in Z^2(\mathfrak{U}, \mathbf{Z})$ and is a representative for $\delta(g) \in H^2(X, \mathbf{Z

be the Chern form of $E$, concluding the proof of the theorem. Choose $\tau$ and $\mu$ in the construction of the mapping (4.6) by letting $\tau = \sigma$ and $\mu = \{\mu_\alpha\}$, where

$$\mu_\alpha = \frac{1}{2\pi i} \partial \log h_\alpha.$$

Then we see that this choice of $\mu = \{\mu_\alpha\}$ satisfies

$$(\delta \mu)_{\alpha \beta} = \mu_\beta - \mu_\alpha = \frac{1}{2\pi i} \partial \log \frac{h_\beta}{h_\alpha}$$

$$= \frac{1}{2\pi i} \partial \log g_{\alpha \beta} \bar{g}_{\alpha \beta}$$

$$= \frac{1}{2\pi i} (\partial \log g_{\alpha \beta} + \partial \log \bar{g}_{\alpha \beta})$$

$$= \frac{1}{2\pi i} d \log g_{\alpha \beta}$$

$$= d \sigma_{\alpha \beta} = d \tau_{\alpha \beta}$$

(here $\partial \log \bar{g}_{\beta \alpha} = 0$, since $g_{\beta \alpha}$ is holomorphic). Thus the closed 2-form associated with the cocycle $\delta \sigma$ is given by

$$\varphi = -d \mu = d \left( \frac{i}{2\pi} \partial \log h_\alpha \right)$$

$$= \frac{i}{2\pi} \bar{\partial} \partial \log h_\alpha = c_1(E, h).$$

Q.E.D.

A modification of the above proof shows that Theorem 4.5 is also true in the $C^\infty$ category. Namely, there is an exact sequence

$$0 \rightarrow \mathbf{Z} \rightarrow \mathcal{E} \rightarrow \mathcal{E}^* \rightarrow 0$$

on a differentiable manifold $X$, where $\mathcal{E}^*$ is the sheaf of nonvanishing $C^\infty$ functions. The induced sequence in cohomology reads

$$\rightarrow H^1(X, \mathcal

Here we may have $H^1(X, \mathcal{O})$ or $H^2(X, \mathcal{O})$ nonvanishing, and line bundles would not be determined by their Chern class in $H^2(X, \mathbf{Z})$. We want to characterize the image of $c_1$ in the above diagram. Let $\tilde{H}^2_{1,1}(X, \mathbf{Z})$ be the cohomology classes in $\tilde{H}^2(X, \mathbf{Z})$ which admit a $d$-closed differential form of type (1, 1) as a representative, and let

$$H^2_{1,1}(X, \mathbf{Z}) = j^{-1}(\tilde{H}^2_{1,1}(X, \mathbf{Z})) \subset H^2(X, \mathbf{Z}).$$

**Proposition 4.6:** In (4.7),

$$c_1(H^1(X, \mathcal{O}^*)) = \tilde{H}^2_{1,1}(X, \mathbf{Z}).$$

**Proof:** It suffices to show that

$$\delta(H^1(X, \mathcal{O}^*)) = H^2_{1,1}(X, \mathbf{Z}) \text{ in (4.7).}$$

To see this, it suffices to show that the image of $H^2_{1,1}(X, \mathbf{Z})$ in $H^2(X, \mathcal{O})$ is zero. Consider the following commutative diagram of sheaves (all natural inclusions),

$$\text{C} \rightarrow \emptyset,$$

and the induced diagram on cohomology,

$$H^2(X, \mathbf{C}) \rightarrow H^2(X, \mathcal{O}).$$

Now $\tilde{H}^2_{1,1}(X, \mathbf{Z}) \subset H^2(X, \mathbf{C})$ and is the image of $H^2_{1,1}(X, \mathbf{Z})$ in the above diagram. Therefore it suffices to show that the image of $H^2_{1,1}(X, \mathbf{C})$ (defined as before) in $H^2

on a complex manifold $X$. Consider the exact sequence of multiplicative sheaves

(4.8) $0 \longrightarrow \mathcal{O}^* \longrightarrow \mathfrak{M}^* \longrightarrow \mathfrak{M}^* / \mathcal{O}^* \longrightarrow 0$

where $\mathcal{O}^*$ was defined above and $\mathfrak{M}^*$ is the sheaf of non-trivial meromorphic functions on $X$; i.e., the stalk $\mathfrak{M}_x^*$ is the group of non-zero elements of the quotient field of the integral domain $\mathcal{O}_x$ at a point $x \in X$ (see Gunning and Rossi [1], for the proofs of the algebraic structure of $\mathcal{O}_x$; i.e., $\mathcal{O}_x$ is a Noetherian local ring; moreover, $\mathcal{O}_x$ is an integral domain, with unique factorization). We let $\mathcal{D} = \mathfrak{M}^* / \mathcal{O}^*$, and this is called the sheaf of divisors on $X$. A section of $\mathcal{D}$ is called a divisor. If $D \in H^0(X, \mathcal{D})$, then there is a covering $\mathfrak{A} = \{U_\alpha\}$ and meromorphic functions (sections of $\mathfrak{M}^*$) $f_\alpha$ defined in $U_\alpha$ such that

(4.9) $\frac{f_\beta}{f_\alpha} = g_{\alpha\beta} \in \mathcal{O}^* (U_\alpha \cap U_\beta)$.

Moreover,

$g_{\alpha\beta} \cdot g_{\beta\gamma} \cdot g_{\gamma\alpha} = 1$ on $U_\alpha \cap U_\beta \cap U_\gamma$.

Thus a divisor gives rise to an equivalence class of line bundles represented by the cocycle $\{g_{\alpha\beta}\}$. This is seen more easily by looking at the exact sequence in cohomology induced by (4.8), namely

(4.10) $H^0(X, \mathfrak{