

CHAPTER V

COMPACT

COMPLEX MANIFOLDS

In this chapter we shall apply the differential equations and differential geometry of the previous two chapters to the study of compact complex manifolds. In Sec. 1 we shall present a discussion of the exterior algebra on a Hermitian vector space, introducing the fundamental 2-form and the Hodge $*$-operator associated with the Hermitian metric. In Sec. 2 we shall discuss and prove the principal results concerning harmonic forms on compact manifolds (real or complex), in particular, Hodge’s harmonic representation for the de Rham groups, and special cases of Poincaré and Serre duality. In Sec. 3 we present the finite-dimensional representation theory for the Lie algebra $\mathfrak{sl}(2, \mathbf{C})$, from which we derive the Lefschetz decomposition theorem for a Hermitian exterior algebra. In Sec. 4 we shall introduce the concept of a Kähler metric and give various examples of Kähler manifolds (manifolds equipped with a Kähler metric). In terms of a Hermitian metric we define the Laplacian operators associated with the operators $d$, $\partial$, and $\bar{\partial}$ and show that when the metric is Kähler that the Laplacians are related in a simple way. We shall use this relationship in Sec. 5 to prove the Hodge decomposition theorem expressing the de Rham group as a direct sum of the Dolbeault groups (of the same total degree). In Sec. 6 we shall state and prove Hodge’s generalization of the Riemann period relations for integrals of harmonic forms on a Kähler manifold. We shall then use the period relations and the Hodge decomposition to formulate the period mapping of Griffiths. In particular, we shall prove the Kodaira-Spencer upper semicontinuity theorem for the Hodge numbers on complex-analytic families of compact manifolds.

1. Hermitian Exterior Algebra on a Hermitian Vector Space

Let $V$ be a real finite-dimensional vector space of dimension $d$ which is equipped with an inner product $\langle , \rangle$, a Euclidean vector space, and suppose that $\wedge V$ denotes the exterior algebra of $V$. Then for each degree $p$, the vector space

$V$ is a choice of ordering of a basis such as $\{e_1, \ldots, e_d\}$ up to an even permutation, which is equivalent to a choice of sign for a particular $d$-form, e.g., $e_1 \wedge \cdots \wedge e_d$.

We now define the Hodge $*-operator$. Choosing an orthonormal basis $\{e_1, \ldots, e_d\}$ for $V$ as above, fix an orientation of $V$ by specifying the $d$ form $e_1 \wedge \cdots \wedge e_d$ which we will denote by vol (for volume element). The Hodge $*-operator$ is a mapping

$$*: \wedge^p V \longrightarrow \wedge^{d-p} V$$

defined by setting

$$*(e_{i_1} \wedge \cdots \wedge e_{i_p}) = \pm e_{j_1} \wedge \cdots \wedge e_{j_{d-p}},$$

where $\{j_1, \ldots, j_{d-p}\}$ is the complement of $\{i_1, \ldots, i_p\}$ in $\{1, \ldots, d\}$, and we assign the plus sign if $\{i_1, \ldots, i_p, j_1, \ldots, j_{d-p}\}$ is an even permutation of $\{1, \ldots, d\}$, and the minus sign otherwise. In other words $*$ is defined so that

(1.1) $e_{i_1} \wedge \cdots \wedge e_{i_p} \wedge *(e_{i_1} \wedge \cdots \wedge e_{i_p}) = e_1 \wedge \cdots \wedge e_d = \text{vol.}$

Extending $*$ by linearity to all of $\wedge^p V$ we find that if $\alpha, \beta \in \wedge^p V$, then

(1.2) $\alpha \wedge *\beta = \langle \alpha, \beta \rangle \text{vol},$

where $\langle \alpha, \beta \rangle$ is the

We can extend (1.2) easily to complex-valued $p$-forms. Namely, if $\alpha, \beta \in \wedge^p V \otimes \mathbf{C}$, then $\bar{\beta}$ is well defined (cf. Sec. I.3). We write

$$\alpha = \sum_{|I|=p}^\prime \alpha_I e_I, \quad \alpha_I \in \mathbf{C},$$

$$\beta = \sum_{|I|=p}^\prime \beta_I e_I, \quad \beta_I \in \mathbf{C},$$

then we define an Hermitian inner product on $\wedge^p V \otimes \mathbf{C}$ by

$$\langle \alpha, \beta \rangle := \sum_{|I|=p}^\prime \alpha_I \bar{\beta}_I.$$

If $\alpha, \beta$ are real, then we have the original inner product, so we use the same symbol $\langle , \rangle$ for this complex extension. It follows then immediately that if $*$ is extended to $\wedge^* V \otimes \mathbf{C}$ by complex linearity, we obtain the relation

(1.3) $$\alpha \wedge *\bar{\beta} = \langle \alpha, \beta \rangle \text{ vol.}$$

Let $\Pi_r$ denote the projection onto homogeneous vectors of degree $r$,

$$\Pi_r: \wedge V \longrightarrow \wedge^r V,$$

and define the linear mapping $w: \wedge V \rightarrow \wedge V$ by setting

$$w = \Sigma(-1)^{dr+r}\Pi_r.$$

It is easy to see that $** = w$, and we remark that if $d$ is even, then we have

(1.4) $$w = \Sigma(-1)^r\Pi_r.$$

Let $E$ be a complex vector space of complex dimension $n$. Let $E'$ be the real dual space to the underlying real vector space of $E$, and let

$$F = E' \otimes_{\mathbf{R}} \mathbf{C}$$

be the complex vector space of complex-valued real-linear mappings of $E$ to $\mathbf

and this induces (as in Sec. I.3) a bigrading on $\wedge F$,

$$\wedge F = \sum_{r=0}^{2n} \sum_{p+q=r} \wedge^{p,q} F,$$

and we see that if $\omega \in \wedge^{p,q} F$, then $\overline{\omega} \in \wedge^{q,p} F$.

Now we suppose than our complex vector space is equipped with a Hermitian inner product $\langle, \rangle$. This inner product is a Hermitian symmetric sesquilinear† positive definite form, and can be represented in the following manner. If $\{z_1, \ldots, z_n\}$ is a basis for $\wedge^{1,0} F$, then $\{\bar{z}_1, \ldots, \bar{z}_n\}$ is a basis for $\wedge^{0,1} F$, and we can write, for $u, v \in E$,

$$\langle u, v \rangle = h(u, v),$$

where

$$h = \sum_{\mu,v} h_{\mu v} z_\mu \otimes \bar{z}_v,$$

and $(h_{\alpha\beta})$ is a positive definite Hermitian symmetric matrix. Now $h$ is a complex-valued sesquilinear form acting on $E \times E$, and we can write

$$h = S + i A,$$

where $S$ and $A$ are real bilinear forms acting on $E$. One finds that $S$ is a symmetric positive definite bilinear form, which represents the Euclidean inner product induced on the underlying real vector space of $E$ by the Hermitian metric on $E$. Moreover one can calculate easily that

$$A = \frac{1}{2i} \sum_{\mu,v} h_{\mu v} \left( z_\mu \otimes \bar{z}_v - \bar{z}_v \otimes z_\mu \right)$$

$$= -i \sum_{\mu,v} h_{\mu v} z_\mu \wedge \bar{z}_v.$$

Let us define

(1.5) $$\Om

It then follows that, if we let

$$x_{\mu} = \frac{z_{\mu} + \bar{z}_{\mu}}{2}, \quad y_{\mu} = \frac{z_{\mu} - \bar{z}_{\mu}}{2i}$$

be the real and imaginary parts of $\{z_{\mu}\}$, then

(1.8) $$h = \sum_{\mu} (x_{\mu} \otimes x_{\mu} + y_{\mu} \otimes y_{\mu}) - 2i \sum_{\mu} (x_{\mu} \wedge y_{\mu}),$$

and thus from (1.5), with respect to this basis,

(1.9) $$\Omega = \sum x_{\mu} \wedge y_{\mu} = \frac{i}{2} \sum z_{\mu} \wedge \bar{z}_{\mu}.$$

It follows from this that

(1.10) $$\Omega^n = n! x_1 \wedge y_1 \wedge \cdots \wedge x_n \wedge y_n.$$

Thus the fundamental 2-form associated to a Hermitian metric is a real form of type (1, 1) whose coefficient matrix is positive definite, and moreover, $\Omega^n$ is a nonzero volume element of $E'$. Thus $\Omega^n$ determines an orientation on $E'$, and we see from (1.9) that $\{x_{\mu}, y_{\mu}\}$ is an orthonormal basis for $E'$ in the induced Euclidean metric of $E'$. Thus we see that there is a naturally defined Hodge $*$-operator

(1.11) $$\ast: \wedge^p E' \longrightarrow \wedge^{2n-p} E'$$

coming from the Hermitian structure of $E$. Namely, $E'$ has the dual metric to the real underlying vector space of $E$, while $E'$ is equipped with the orientation induced by the $2n$-form $\Omega^n$ coming from the Hermitian structure of $E$. We define

(1.12) $$\text{vol} = \frac{1}{n!} \Omega^n,$$

which,

is the natural projection. Similarly, since $E$ has a Hermitian structure, as we saw above, there is a natural $*$-operator

$$*: \wedge^p E' \longrightarrow \wedge^{2n-p} E'$$

which we also extend as a complex-linear isomorphism to

$$*: \wedge^p F \longrightarrow \wedge^{2n-p} F.$$

Both $w$ and $*$ are real operators. Now we let

$$\Pi_{p,q}: \wedge F \longrightarrow \wedge^{p,q} F$$

be the natural projection, and we define

$$J: \wedge F \longrightarrow \wedge F$$

by

$$J = \sum i^{p-q} \Pi_{p,q}.$$

Recall that the real operator $J$ which represents the complex structure of the vector space $F$ has the property that if $v \in \wedge^{1,0} F$, then $Jv = iv$, and if $v \in \wedge^{0,1} F$, then $Jv = -iv$. Thus we see immediately that $J$ defined above is the natural multilinear extension of the complex structure operator $J$ to the exterior algebra of $F$. We note also that $J^2 = w$ as linear operators.

We now define a linear mapping $L$ in terms of $\Omega$, the fundamental form associated to the Hermitian structure of $E$, namely, let

$$L: \wedge F \longrightarrow \wedge F$$

be defined by $L(v) = \Omega \wedge v$. We see that

$$L: \wedge^p F \longrightarrow \wedge^{p+2} F$$

so it is homogeneous and of degree 2. Moreover,

$$L: \wedge^{p,q} F \longrightarrow \wedge^{p+1,q+1} F$$

and $L$ is bihomogeneous of bidegree (1, 1), and it is apparent that $L$ is a real operator since $\Omega$ is a real 2-form. Recall from (1.3) that $\wedge^p F$ has a natural Hermitian

To see that (1.13) holds we compute, for $\alpha \in \wedge^p F, \beta \in \wedge^{p+2} F$,

$$\langle L\alpha, \beta \rangle \text{vol} = \Omega \wedge \alpha \wedge (*\bar{\beta})$$

$$= \alpha \wedge \Omega \wedge (*\bar{\beta})$$

$$= \alpha \wedge L*\bar{\beta}$$

$$= \alpha \wedge *w*L*\bar{\beta}$$

$$= \alpha \wedge *w*L*\bar{\beta}$$

$$= \langle \alpha, w*L*\beta \rangle \text{vol}$$

$$= \langle \alpha, L*\beta \rangle \text{vol}$$

using the fact that $*w* = id$, and $*, L$, and $w$ are real operators. It follows from (1.13) that $L^*$ is a real operator, homogeneous of degree $-2$. It will follow from the next proposition that $L^*$ is bihomogeneous of degree $(-1, -1)$.

If $M$ and $N$ are two endomorphisms of a vector space, then we will denote by $[M, N] = MN - NM$ the commutator of the two endomorphisms. We now have a basic proposition giving fundamental relationships between the above operators.

**Proposition 1.1:** Let $E$ be a Hermitian vector space of complex dimension $n$ with fundamental form $\Omega$ and associated operators $w, J, L$, and $L^*$. Then

(a) $*\Pi_{p,q} = \Pi_{n-q,n-p}^*$,

(b) $[L, w] = [L, J] = [L^*, w] = [L^*, J] = 0$,

(c) $[L^*, L] = \sum_{p=0}^{2n}(n-p)\Pi_p$.

To prove Proposition 1.1, it is necessary to introduce some notation which will allow us to effectively work with the convectors in $\wedge F$. Let $N = \{1,

that this leads to no confusion. Any element of $\wedge F$ can be written in the form

$$\sum_{A,B,M} c_{A,B,M} z_A \wedge \bar{z}_B \wedge w_M,$$

where $c_{A,B,M} \in \mathbf{C}$, and $A, B$, and $M$ are (for a given term) mutually disjoint multiindices, and, as before, the prime on the summation sign indicates that the sum is taken over multiindices whose elements are strictly increasing sequences (what we shall call an increasing multiindex).

We have the following fundamental and elementary lemma which shows the interaction between the $\ast$-operator (defined in terms of the real structure) and the bigrading on $\wedge F$ (defined in terms of the complex structure).

**Lemma 1.2:** Suppose that $A, B$, and $M$ are mutually disjoint increasing multiindices. Then

$$*(z_A \wedge \bar{z}_B \wedge w_M) = \gamma(a, b, m) z_A \wedge \bar{z}_B \wedge w_M'$$

for a nonvanishing constant $\gamma(a, b, m)$, where $a = |A|, b = |B|, m = |M|$, and $M' = N - (A \cup B \cup M)$. Moreover,

$$\gamma(a, b, m) = i^{a-b} (-1)^{p(p+1)/2+m} (-2i)^{p-n}$$

where $p = a + b + 2m$ is the total degree of $z_A \wedge \bar{z}_B \wedge w_M$.

**Proof:** Let $\upsilon = z_A \wedge \bar{z}_B \wedge w_M$. If $A = A_1 \cup A_2$ for some multiindex $A$, let

$$\epsilon_A^{A_1 A_2} = \begin{cases} 0 & \text{if } A_1 \cap A_2 \neq \emptyset \\ 1 & \text{if } A_1 A_2 \text{ is an even permutation of } A \\ -1 & \text{if }

To do this it suffices (because of the commutativity of $\prod_{\mu \in M} x_{\mu} \wedge y_{\mu}$) to consider the product (setting $a_2 = |A_2|$)

$$x_{A_1} \wedge y_{A_2} \wedge x_{A_2} \wedge y_{A_1} = (-1)^{a_2^2} x_{A_1} \wedge y_{A_1} \wedge x_{A_2} \wedge y_{A_2}.$$

Now, in general,

$$x_C \wedge y_C = (-1)^{|C|(|C|-1)/2} x_{\mu_1} \wedge y_{\mu_2} \wedge \cdots \wedge x_{\mu|C|} \wedge y_{\mu|C|},$$

and applying this to our problem above, we see immediately that the sign in (1.2) is of the form

$$(-1)^{a_2^2+a_1(a_1-1)/2+a_2(a_2-1)/2} = (-1)^r.$$

Putting this into (1.1), we obtain

$$\ast(z_A \wedge w_M) = (-2i)^m \sum_{A=A_1 \cup A_2} \epsilon_A^{A_1 A_2} i^{a_2} (-1)^r x_{A_2} \wedge y_{A_1} \wedge \prod_{\mu \in M'} x_{\mu} \wedge y_{\mu}.$$

The idea now is to change variables in the summation. We write

$$\epsilon_A^{A_1 A_2} = (-1)^{a_1 a_2} \epsilon_A^{A_2 A_1}$$

$$i^{a_2} = i^a (-1)^{a_1} i^{a_1},$$

and substituting in (1.3) we obtain

$$\ast(z_A \wedge w_M) = i^a (-2i)^m \sum_{A=A_1 \cup A_2} \epsilon_A^{A_2 A_1} i

where $M' = N - (A \cup B \cup M)$, as before. On the other hand, we see that, using Lemma 1.2 and the definition of $\Lambda$,

$$\Lambda(z_A \wedge \bar{z}_B \wedge w_M) = \frac{2}{i} z_A \wedge \bar{z}_B \wedge \left( \sum_{\mu \in M} w_{M-|\mu|} \right).$$

Using these formulas, one obtains easily, assuming that $z_A \wedge \bar{z}_B \wedge w_M$ has total degree $p$,

$$\Lambda L - L\Lambda = (n - p)z_A \wedge \bar{z}_B \wedge w_M,$$

and part (c) of Proposition 1.1 follows immediately.

Q.E.D.

2. Harmonic Theory on Compact Manifolds

In this section we want to give further applications of the theory of harmonic differential forms on compact (differentiable or complex) manifolds. As we have seen in Chap. IV, the Laplacian on a Riemannian manifold is defined by $dd^* + d^*d$, where $d^*$ is the adjoint with respect to some inner product on the (elliptic) complex $\mathcal{E}^*(X)$ of complex-valued differential forms on $X$. We want to use the $*$-operator of Sec. 1 to define a particular inner product for the vector space of differential forms of a given degree, from which will follow a useful formula for the adjoint operator $d^*$ (and related operators).

Suppose that $X$ is a compact oriented Riemannian manifold of $d$ dimensions. Then the orientation and Riemannian structure define the $*$-operator as in Sec. 1:

$$*: \wedge^p T_x^*(X) \xrightarrow{\cong} \wedge^{d-p} T_x^*(X)$$

at each point $x \in X$. Moreover, $*$ defines a smooth bundle map, since we can define it in the neighborhood of a point by choosing a smooth local (oriented) orthonormal frame. Hence $*$ induces an isomorphism of sections

If $X$ is an oriented Riemannian manifold, then $X$ carries a volume element $dV$, which is nothing but a $d$-form $\varphi \in \mathcal{E}^d(X)$, with the property that in any oriented system of local coordinates $U \subset X$

$$\varphi(x) = f(x)dx_1 \wedge \cdots \wedge dx_d,$$

where $f(x) > 0$ for all $x \in U$. By means of the $*$-operator it is easy to see that

$$\varphi = *(1), \quad (1 \in \mathbf{C} \subset \mathcal{E}^0(X))$$

is indeed a volume element on $X$.

Remark: Denote in local coordinates the Riemannian metric on $X$ by

$$ds^2 = g_{ij}dx^i \otimes dx^j,$$

using the summation convention, where $g_{ij}$ is a symmetric positive definite matrix of functions. If we let $g^{ij}$ be defined by

$$g^{ij}g_{jk} = \delta_k^i \quad (\text{Kronecker delta}),$$

and if we raise indices by setting

$$a^{i_1 \cdots i_p} = g^{i_1 j_1} \cdot g^{i_2 j_2} \cdot \cdots \cdot g^{i_p j_p}a_{i_1 \cdots i_p},$$

then we can express the $*$-operator given by the metric $ds^2$ explicitly in terms of these quantities (cf., deRham [1], pp. 119–122). Namely, we have, if

$$\alpha = \sum_{i_1 < \cdots < i_p} \alpha_{i_1 \cdots i_p}dx^{i_1} \wedge \cdots \wedge dx^{i_p},$$

then

$$(*\alpha) = \sum_{j_1 < \cdots < j_d-p} (*\alpha)_{j_1 \cdots j_d-p}dx^{j_1} \wedge \cdots \wedge dx^{j_d-p},$$

where

$$(*

Proposition 2.1: The form $(,)$ defined by (2.1) defines a positive definite, Hermitian symmetric, sesquilinear form on the complex vector space $\mathcal{E}^*(X) = \bigoplus_{p=0}^{d} \mathcal{E}^p(X)$.

Proof: The Riemannian metric on $X$ induces an Hermitian inner product $\langle , \rangle$ on $\wedge^p T \ast_x(X)$ for each $x \in X$, given by, for $\varphi, \psi$ $p$-forms on $X$,

$$\varphi \wedge \ast \bar{\psi} = \langle \varphi, \psi \rangle \text{vol}$$

as we saw in (1.3). It is then clear that

$$(\varphi, \psi) = \int_X \varphi \wedge \ast \bar{\psi} = \int_X \langle \varphi, \psi \rangle \text{vol}$$

is a positive semidefinite, sesquilinear Hermitian form on $\mathcal{E}^p(X)$. To see that $(,)$ is positive definite, suppose that $\varphi \in \mathcal{E}^p(X)$ is not equal to zero at $x_0 \in X$, then near $x_0$, we can express $\varphi$ in terms of a local oriented orthonormal frame for $T \ast(X) \otimes \mathbf{C}$, $\{e_1, \ldots, e_d\}$,

$$\varphi = \sum_{|I|=p} \varphi_I e_I,$$

and

$$\varphi \wedge \ast \bar{\varphi} = \sum_{|I|=p} |\varphi_I|^2 \text{vol}$$

near $x_0$, and $\sum_{|J|=p} |\varphi_I|^2 > 0$ near $x_0$. Then the contribution to the integral

$$(\varphi, \varphi) = \int_X \varphi \wedge \ast \bar{\varphi}$$

will be nonzero, and thus $(\varphi, \varphi) > 0$.

Q.E.D.

Thus the elliptic complex $(\mathcal{E}^*(X), d

Proof: Suppose that $\varphi \in \mathcal{E}^{p,q}(X)$ and that $\psi \in \mathcal{E}^{r,s}(X)$, where $p+q=r+s$. Then we see that $\varphi \wedge *\bar{\psi}$ is of type $(n-r+p, n-s+q)$, since $\bar{\psi}$ is of type $(s,r)$ and $*\bar{\psi}$ is then of type $(n-r,n-s)$ by Proposition 1.1. Therefore $\varphi \wedge *\bar{\psi}$ is a 2n-form if and only if $r=p$ and $s=q$. Otherwise, $\varphi \wedge *\bar{\psi}$ is identically zero. This proves the proposition.

Q.E.D.

Using the Hodge inner product, it will be very easy to compute the adjoints of various linear operators acting on $\mathcal{E}^{*}(X)$ (cf. the computation of $L*$ in Sec. 1). First we want to modify the $*-operator$ in a manner which will be convenient for this purpose. On an oriented Riemannian manifold we define

$$\bar{\cdot}: \mathcal{E}^{*}(X) \longrightarrow \mathcal{E}^{*}(X)$$

by setting $\bar{\cdot}(\varphi) = *\bar{\varphi}$. Thus $\bar{\cdot}$ is a conjugate-linear isomorphism of vector bundles,

$$\bar{\cdot}: \wedge^{p} T^{*}(X)_{c} \longrightarrow \wedge^{m-p} T^{*}(X)_{c},$$

where $m = \dim_{\mathbf{R}} X$. Suppose that $X$ is now a Hermitian complex manifold and that $E \longrightarrow X$ is a Hermitian vector bundle. Let

$$\tau: E \longrightarrow E^{*}$$

be a conjugate-linear bundle isomorphism of $E$ onto its dual bundle $E*$. The mapping $\tau$ depends on the Hermitian metric of $E$ and is defined fibrewise in a standard manner. We then define

$$\bar{\cdot}_{E}: \wedge^{p} T^{*}(X)_{c} \otimes E \

By using a basis for $E$ and a dual basis for $E^*$, we can extend this exterior product to vector-bundle-valued differential forms, and it is easily checked that the resulting exterior product is independent of the choice of basis. Thus (2.4) defines what we shall call a Hodge inner product on $\mathcal{E}^*(X, E)$. Then it is easy to see that $\bar{*}_E$ preserves the bigrading on $\mathcal{E}^*(X, E)$, and that, in fact,

$$\bar{*}_E: \mathcal{E}^{p,q}(X, E) \xrightarrow{\sim} \mathcal{E}^{n-p,n-q}(X, E^*)$$

is a conjugate-linear isomorphism. It is then clear that Proposition 2.2 extends to this case.

We are now in a position to compute the adjoints of various operators with respect to the Hodge inner product. Moreover, all adjoints in this and later sections of the book will be with respect to the Hodge inner product.

**Proposition 2.3:** Let $X$ be an oriented compact Riemannian manifold of real dimension $m$ and let $\Delta = dd^* + d^*d$, where the adjoint $d^*$ is defined with respect to the Hodge inner product on $\mathcal{E}^*(X)$. Then

(a) $d^* = (-1)^{m+mp+1}\bar{d}\bar{*} = (-1)^{m+mp+1}d*$ on $\mathcal{E}^p(X)$.

(b) $\bar{\Delta} = \Delta*$, $\bar{\Delta} = \Delta\bar{*}$.

**Proof:** The basic fact we need is that $\ast = w$, as defined in Sec. 1. Suppose that $\varphi \in \mathcal{E}^{p-1}(X)$ and that $\psi \in \mathcal{E}^p(X)$. Then we consider

$$\left(d\varphi, \psi\right) = \int_X d\varphi \wedge \bar{\psi}$$

$$= \int_X d(\varphi \wedge \bar{\psi}) - (-1)^{p-1} \int_X \varphi \wedge d\bar{\psi},$$

and so it suffices to show that (recall that $w = **$)

$$wd*d\varphi = d*dw\varphi.$$

But this is simple, since $w = \sum (-1)^{p+mp}\Pi_p$, and thus the right-hand side is $d*d(-1)^{p+mp}\varphi$, whereas the left-hand side has degree $m-p$, and so

$$wd*d\varphi = (-1)^{m-p+m(m-p)}d*d\varphi = (-1)^{p+mp}d*d\varphi.$$

Q.E.D.

We have a similar result for the Hermitian case. Note that $\bar{*}_{E*}$ is defined in the same way as $\bar{*}_E$ by using $\tau^{-1}$: $E^* \longrightarrow E$.

**Proposition 2.4:** Let $X$ be a Hermitian complex manifold and let $E \longrightarrow X$ be a Hermitian holomorphic vector bundle. Then

(a) $\bar{\partial}: \mathcal{E}^{p,q}(X, E) \longrightarrow \mathcal{E}^{p,q+1}(X, E)$ has an adjoint $\bar{\partial}^*$ with respect to the Hodge inner product on $\mathcal{E}^{**}(X, E)$ given by

$$\bar{\partial}^* = -\bar{*}_{E*} \bar{\partial} \bar{*}_E.$$

(b) If $\overline{\Box} = \bar{\partial}\bar{\partial}^* + \bar{\partial}^*\bar{\partial}$ is the complex Laplacian acting on $\mathcal{E}^{**}(X, E)$, then

$$\overline{\Box} \bar{*}_E = \bar{*}_E \overline{\Box}.$$

**Proof:** In this case we also have $\bar{*}_E \bar{*}_{E*} = w = \sum (-1)^p\Pi_p$, a simpler expression since the real dimension of $X$ is even. The proof of (a) then follows as before, with minor modification. Suppose that $\varphi \in \mathcal{E}^{p,q-1}(X, E)$ and that $\psi \in \mathcal{

do not annihilate the transition functions defining $E$. However, in the scalar case, we have $\partial: \mathcal{E}^{p,q}(X) \longrightarrow \mathcal{E}^{p+1,q}(X)$, and by the same calculation as above we obtain that $\partial^* = -\bar{\partial}\bar{*}$ and that $\Box = \partial\partial^* + \partial^*\partial$ commutes with $\bar{*}$, exactly the same as the $\bar{\partial}$-operator case.

Using the above results we can derive two well-known duality theorems. We first remark that a finite dimensional complex vector space $E$ is conjugate-linearly isomorphic to a complex vector space $F$ if and only if $F$ is complex-linearly isomorphic to $E^*$, the dual of $E$ (and the bilinear pairing of $E$ to $F$ can be obtained from a Hermitian inner product on $E$).

**Theorem 2.5 (Poincaré duality):** Let $X$ be a compact $m$-dimensional orientable differentiable manifold. Then there is a conjugate linear isomorphism

$$\sigma: H^r(X, \mathbf{C}) \longrightarrow H^{m-r}(X, \mathbf{C}),$$

and hence $H^{m-r}(X, \mathbf{C})$ is isomorphic to the dual of $H^r(X, \mathbf{C})$.

**Proof:** Introduce a Riemannian metric and an orientation on $X$ and let $*$ be the associated $*$-operator. Then we have the commutative diagram

$$\mathcal{E}^r(X) \xrightarrow{\bar{*}} \mathcal{E}^{m-r}(X)$$

$$\downarrow H_{\Delta} \quad \downarrow H_{\Delta}$$

$$\mathcal{H}^r(X) \xrightarrow{\bar{*}} \mathcal{H}^{m-r}(X)$$

$$\parallel \parallel$$

$$H^r(X, \mathbf{C}) \xrightarrow{\sigma} H^{m-r}(X, \mathbf{C})$$

where $H_{\Delta}$ is the projection onto

Theorem 2.7 (Serre duality): Let $X$ be a compact complex manifold of complex dimension $n$ and let $E \longrightarrow X$ be a holomorphic vector bundle over $X$. Then there is a conjugate linear isomorphism

$$\sigma: H^r(X, \Omega^p(E)) \longrightarrow H^{n-r}(X, \Omega^{n-p}(E^*))$$

and hence these spaces are dual to one another.

Proof: By introducing Hermitian metrics on $X$ and $E$, we can define the $\bar{*}_E$ operator. Then we obtain the following commutative diagram,

$$\mathcal{E}^{p,q}(X, E) \xrightarrow{\bar{*}_E} \mathcal{E}^{n-p,n-q}(X, E^*)$$

$$\downarrow H_{\square} \quad \downarrow H_{\square}$$

$$\mathcal{H}^{p,q}(X, E) \xrightarrow{\bar{*}_E} \mathcal{H}^{n-p,n-q}(X, E^*)$$

$$\parallel \quad \parallel$$

$$H^{p,q}(X, E) \xrightarrow{\tau} H^{n-p,n-q}(X, E^*)$$

$$\parallel \quad \parallel$$

$$H^{p}(X, \Omega^p(E)) \xrightarrow{\sigma} H^{n-q}(X, \Omega^{n-p}(E^*))$$

which proves the result immediately. Once again, $\bar{*}_E$ maps harmonic forms to harmonic forms by Proposition 2.4, and the $\{H^{p,q}(X, E)\}$ are the Dolbeault groups [the cohomology of the complex $(\mathcal{E}^{p,*}(X, E), \bar{\partial})$], which are isomorphic to $H^{q}(X, \Omega^p(E))$, as we saw in Theorem II.3.20.

Q.E.D.

Remark: Serre proved this also in the case of noncompact manifolds, under certain closed range hypotheses on $\bar{\partial}$ and by using coh

survey the principal ideas needed for the applications we have in mind. We will use some elementary facts and terminology concerning Lie groups and Lie algebras as is found in any introduction to the subject (e.g., Chevalley [1], Helgason [1], Varadarajan [1]), such as the Lie algebra of a Lie group, and the associated exponential mapping, invariant measure on Lie groups, etc., although we will be using these concepts only for specific low-dimensional matrix groups and matrix algebras.

We recall that a Lie algebra is a vector space $\mathfrak{A}$ equipped with a Lie bracket product $[,]$ which is anticommutative, and which satisfies the Jacobi identity

$$[X, [Y, Z]] + [Y, [Z, X]] + [Z, [X, Y]] = 0.$$

An algebra of matrices equipped with the commutator Lie bracket is the prototypical example of a Lie algebra. A representation of a Lie algebra $\mathfrak{A}$ on a complex vector space $V$ is an algebra homomorphism

$$\pi: \mathfrak{A} \longrightarrow \text{End}(V),$$

where $\text{End}(V)$ is the Lie algebra of endomorphisms of $V$ equipped with the commutator Lie bracket $[A, B] = AB - BA$. If $n = \dim V < \infty$, then we say that the representation has dimension $n$. If $\dim V = \infty$, then we say that $\pi$ is an infinite-dimensional representation. A representation $\pi$ is irreducible if there is no proper invariant subspace $V_0 \neq 0$ of $V$. Here $V_0$ is a proper invariant subspace if $0 \neq V_0 \neq V$, and

$$\pi(X)V_0 \subset V_0, \quad \text{for all } X \in \mathfrak{A}.$$

If $\pi_1$ and $\pi_2$ are representations on $V_1$ and $V_2$, respectively, then $\pi = \pi_1 \oplus \pi_2$ is a representation of $\mathfrak{A}$ on $V_1 \oplus V_2

which is norm convergent, and where, for $t \in C$,

$$e^{tX} = I + tX + O(|t|^2),$$

(3.2)

$$e^{tX}e^{tY} = I + t(X + Y) + O(|t|^2),$$

$$e^{tX}e^{tY}e^{-tX}e^{-tY} = I + t^2([X, Y]) + O(|t|^3),$$

which indicates the basic relationship between the group law in $SL(2, \mathbf{C})$ and the Lie bracket in $\mathfrak{sl}(2, \mathbf{C})$.

Now consider the subgroup $SU(2)$ of $SL(2, \mathbf{C})$ consisting of unitary $2 \times 2$ matrices of determinant one. It follows readily from (3.2) that $\mathfrak{su}(2)$, the corresponding Lie algebra of $SU(2)$, consists of skew-Hermitian $2 \times 2$ matrices of trace zero, i.e., $X + X^* = 0$, $tr(X) = 0$, where $X^* = {}^t\overline{X}$ is the Hermitian adjoint. Thus we have the following diagram of groups and algebras, where $i$ is the natural inclusion:

(3.3)

$$\mathfrak{su}(2) \xrightarrow{i} \mathfrak{si}(2, \mathbf{C})$$

$$\downarrow \exp \downarrow \exp$$

$$SU(2) \xrightarrow{i} SL(2, \mathbf{C}).$$

For reference, we will write down explicit generators for these algebraic objects. First we note that $\mathfrak{sl}(2, \mathbf{C})$ has dimension 3 and a basis is given by

(3.4)

$$X = \begin{bmatrix} 0 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 \end{bmatrix}, \quad Y = \begin{bmatrix} 0 & 0 \\ 1 & 0 \end{bmatrix}, \quad H = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 \\ 0 & -1 \

and we see that conjugation by $w$ in $\mathfrak{sl}(2, \mathbf{C})$ gives rise to a reflection with respect to the above basis (the Weyl group reflection). Namely,

$$wHw^{-1} = -H, \quad wXw^{-1} = Y, \quad wYw^{-1} = X.$$

We return now to diagram (3.3). For each of the algebraic objects in (3.3) one considers representations on a complex vector space $V$, as we have done before:

$$[\mathfrak{su}(2) \rightarrow \text{End}(V)]_{\mathbf{R}} \xleftarrow{r_1} [\mathfrak{sl}(2, \mathbf{C}) \rightarrow \text{End}(V)]_{\mathbf{C}}$$

(3.7)

$$[SU(2) \rightarrow GL(V)]_{\mathbf{R}} \xleftarrow{r_2} [SL(2, \mathbf{C}) \rightarrow GL(V)]_{\mathbf{C}}$$

Here $[\mathfrak{su}(2) \rightarrow \text{End}(V)]_{\mathbf{R}}$ denotes $\mathbf{R}$-linear algebra homomorphisms, $[\mathfrak{sl}(2, \mathbf{C}) \rightarrow \text{End}(V)]_{\mathbf{C}}$ denotes $\mathbf{C}$-linear algebra homomorphisms, $[SL(2) \rightarrow GL(V)]_{\mathbf{R}}$ denotes real-analytic group homomorphisms, and $[SL(2, \mathbf{C}) \rightarrow GL(V)]_{\mathbf{C}}$ denotes complex-analytic group homomorphisms. The mappings $r_1$ and $r_2$ are the natural restriction mappings, and $d$ is the derivative mapping, recalling that the Lie algebra of a Lie group is the tangent space to the Lie group at the identity element, and noting that the derivative of a representation of a Lie group is indeed a representation of the associated Lie algebra.

We now have the following proposition.

**Proposition 3.1:** The mappings $r_1, r_2$ and $d$ in (3.7) are all bijective, i.e., there

the following important theorem of H. Weyl concerning complete reducibility of representations of compact Lie groups (the “unitary trick”). We state the theorem in full generality, but will use it only for $G = SU(2)$.

Theorem 3.2: Let $G$ be a compact Lie group, and let $\rho: G \rightarrow GL(V)$ be a representation on a finite-dimensional complex vector space. Then $\rho$ is completely reducible.

Proof: Choose a basis for $V$ so that $V \cong \mathbf{C}^n$. Let $dg$ be the natural left invariant measure on the Lie group $G$ which can be constructed from left invariant differential forms dual to the left invariant vector fields which comprise the Lie algebra of $G$ (see Helgason [1], Chapter X, §1). Then

$$M(g) = \rho(g)\rho(g)^*$$

is a Hermitian positive definite matrix for each $g \in G$. Define

$$M = \int_G M(g)dg,$$

and it follows that $M$ is Hermitian positive definite also. Then consider

$$\rho(g)M\rho(g)^* = \int_G \rho(g)\rho(\tau)\rho(\tau)^*\rho(g)^*d\tau$$

$$= \int_G \rho(g\tau)\rho(g\tau)^*d\tau$$

$$= \int_G \rho(\tau)\rho(\tau)^*d\tau = M,$$

using the invariance of $d\tau$ under the action of $G$ on itself by left translation. Since $M$ is positive definite, we can write

$$M = NN^*$$

where $N$ is positive definite. Then we see that $\tilde{\rho} = N^{-1}\rho N$ is equivalent to $\rho$ and moreover

$$\tilde{\rho}(g)\tilde{\rho}(g)^* = (N^{-1}\rho(g)N)(N^{-1}\rho(g)N)^*$$

$$= N^{-1}\rho(g)NN^*\rho(g)^*(N^{-1})^*$$

$$= N^{-1}M(N^{-1})^*$$

$$= I,$$

and thus $\tilde{\rho}(g)$ is

Proof: This follows immediately from Proposition 3.1, Theorem 3.2 and the fact that the bijections in (3.7) are natural and preserve irreducibility and direct sums.

Q.E.D.

Now we know that any representation $\rho$ of $\mathfrak{sl}(2, \mathbf{C})$ on a finite-dimensional complex vector space $V$ is the direct sum of irreducible representations. We now turn to an explicit description of these irreducible representations, which can be characterized, up to equivalence, by the dimension of the representation space, as we shall see. We start with a definition.

Definition 3.4: Let $\rho$ be a representation of $\mathfrak{sl}(2, \mathbf{C})$ on a finite-dimensional complex vector space $V$. Let $V^\lambda$ be the eigenvectors of $\rho(H)$ with eigenvalue $\lambda$, i.e., for $\lambda \in \mathbf{C}$,

$$V^\lambda = \{v \in V : \rho(H)v = \lambda v\}.$$

We say that $v \in V^\lambda$ has weight $\lambda$. A vector $v \in V$ is said to be primitive of weight $\lambda$ if $v$ is nonzero, $v \in V^\lambda$ and $\rho(X)v = 0$.

We now have some elementary lemmas which lead up to the basic canonical form for a representation of $\mathfrak{sl}(2, \mathbf{C})$. We assume a fixed finite-dimensional representation $\rho$ on $\mathfrak{sl}(2, \mathbf{C})$ on a complex vector space $V$.

Lemma 3.5:

(a) The sum $\sum_{\lambda \in \mathbf{C}} V^\lambda$ is a direct sum,

(b) If $v$ is of weight $\lambda$, then $\rho(X)v$ is of weight $\lambda + 2$ and $\rho(Y)v$ is of weight $\lambda - 2$.

Proof: (a) is simply the assertion that eigenvectors corresponding to different eigenvalues are linearly independent. For (b) we observe that

$$\rho(H)\rho(X)v = (\rho(H)\rho(X) - \rho(X)\rho(H))v + \rho(X)\rho

The nonzero terms in this sequence are linearly independent, since they are eigenvectors with differing eigenvalues (Lemma 3.5), so the sequence must terminate, and hence for some fixed $k$, $\rho(X)^k v_0 = 0$, $\rho(X)^{k-1} v_0 \neq 0$, and thus $v = \rho(X)^{k-1} v_0$ is a primitive vector.

Q.E.D.

We now have the basic description of an irreducible representation of $\mathfrak{sl}(2, \mathbf{C})$ on a finite-dimensional complex vector space.

Theorem 3.7: Let $\rho$ be an irreducible representation of $\mathfrak{sl}(2, \mathbf{C})$ on a finite-dimensional complex vector space $V$. Let $v_0 \in V$ be a primitive vector of weight $\lambda$ for the representation $\rho$. Then, letting $v_{-1} = 0$, and setting

$$v_n = (1/n!) \rho(Y^n) v_0, \quad n = 0, 1, \ldots, m, \ldots,$$

one obtains, for $n \geq 0$,

(a) $\rho(H) v_n = (\lambda - 2n) v_n,$
(b) $\rho(Y) v_n = (n + 1) v_{n+1},$
(c) $\rho(X) v_n = (\lambda - n + 1) v_{n-1}.$

Moreover, $\lambda = m$, where $m + 1 = \dim_{\mathbf{C}} V$, and

$$\rho(Y^n) v_0 = 0, \quad n > m.$$

Proof: (a) asserts that $v_n$ is of weight $\lambda - 2n$, which follows immediately from Lemma 3.5. (b) is clear from the definition of $v_n$, while (c) follows by induction on $n$. Namely, for $n = 0$, we have $\rho(X) v_0 = 0$, since $v_0$ was primitive, and $v_{-1} = 0$. Suppose we know (c) for $n - 1$, then we compute

$$

$V_m$ is invariant under the action of $\rho$ on $V$. Suppose $v = \sum_{n=0}^{m} \alpha_n v_n, \alpha_j \in \mathbf{C}$, then

$$\rho(H)v = \sum_{n=0}^{m} \alpha_n (m - 2n)v_n$$

$$\rho(Y)v = \sum_{n=0}^{m} \alpha_n (n + 1)v_{n+1}$$

$$\rho(X)v = \sum_{n=0}^{m} \alpha_n (m - n + 1)v_{n-1},$$

so $\rho(\mathfrak{sl}(2, \mathbf{C}))V_m \subset V_m$. Thus $V_m$ is a nonzero invariant subspace, and since $\rho$ is assumed irreducible, it follows that $V = V_m$, and that $m + 1 = \dim V$.

Q.E.D.

Remark: We see that the basis $\{v_n\}$ in Theorem 3.7 gives a canonical form for the matrices representing the linear mappings $\rho(H), \rho(Y)$ and $\rho(X)$ acting on $V$. Namely

$$\rho(H) = \begin{bmatrix}
m & 0 & \ldots & 0 \\
0 & m - 2 & & \vdots \\
\vdots & & \ddots & 0 \\
0 & \ldots & 0 & -m
\end{bmatrix}$$

$$\rho(X) = \begin{bmatrix}
0 & m & 0 & \ldots & 0 \\
0 & & \ddots & m - 1 & \vdots \\
\vdots & & & \ddots & \ddots & 1 \\
0 & & & \ldots & 0 & 0
\end{bmatrix}$$

$$\rho(Y) = \begin{bmatrix}
0 & 0 & \ldots & 0 \\
\vdots & & & \vdots \\
0 & \ddots & \ddots & \vdots \\
\vdots & & m - 1 & \ddots & 0 \\
0 & \ldots & 0 & m & 0

Theorem 3.8: Let $V$ be a complex vector space of dimension $m + 1$, with $m \geq 0$, and let $\{v_0, \ldots, v_m\}$ be a basis for $V$. Then define a representation $\rho$ of $\mathfrak{sl}(2, \mathbf{C})$ on $V$ by setting

(a) $\rho(H)v_n = (m - 2n)v_n$,

(b) $\rho(Y)v_n = (n + 1)v_{n+1}$,

(c) $\rho(X)v_n = (m - n + 1)v_{n-1}$,

where $n = 0, \ldots, m$, and $v_{-1} = v_{m+1} = 0$. This representation is irreducible, and any irreducible complex representation of dimension $m + 1$ is equivalent to this one.

Proof: One checks readily that the mapping $\rho: \mathfrak{sl}(2, \mathbf{C}) \rightarrow \text{End}(V)$ given by (3.9) is indeed a representation. Suppose now that $V_0$ is a nonzero subspace of $V$ invariant under $\rho$. Then there is an eigenvector of $\rho(H)$ contained in $V_0$. The list of eigenvectors of $\rho(H)$ in (3.9a) is complete, so $V_0$ must contain one of the vectors $v_k$ for some $k$. But then applying (3.9c) to $v_k$, we see that $v_0 \in V_0$. Then using (3.9b) we see that $V_0$ must contain $v_n, n = 0, \ldots, m$. Thus $V_0 = V$, and $\rho$ is irreducible. It is clear from Theorem 3.7 that an arbitrary irreducible representation of dimension $m + 1$ is equivalent to this one.

Q.E.D.

Corollary 3.9: Suppose $\rho: \mathfrak{sl}(2, \mathbf{C}) \rightarrow V$ is an irreducible representation of dimension $m + 1, m \geq 0$. Let $\varphi

etc., and thus

$$\rho(Y)^r \rho(X)^r v_r = \frac{m!r!}{(m-r)!} v_r,$$

and thus we obtain the useful identity

(3.10) $$v_r = \frac{(m-r)!}{m!r!} \rho(Y)^r \rho(X)^r v_r.$$

Now suppose that $\varphi$ is any eigenvector of $\rho(H)$. Then $\varphi$ is a multiple of one of the eigenvectors $\{v_0, \ldots, v_m\}$ above, say, $\varphi = \alpha v_r$. Then it follows from (3.10) that

$$\varphi = \frac{(m-r)!}{m!r!} \rho(Y)^r \rho(X)^r \varphi,$$

and letting

$$\varphi_0 = \frac{(m-r)!}{m!r!} \rho(X)^r \varphi,$$

we see that $\varphi_0$ is primitive, and the corollary is proven.

Q.E.D.

We now introduce a specific representation of $SL(2, \mathbf{C})$ and its derived representation of $\mathfrak{sl}(2, \mathbf{C})$. Consider $\mathbf{C}^2$ as column vectors, and let

$$v_{1,0} = \begin{bmatrix} 1 \\ 0 \end{bmatrix}, \quad v_{1,1} = \begin{bmatrix} 0 \\ 1 \end{bmatrix}$$

be standard basis vectors. Then $SL(2, \mathbf{C})$ acts on $\mathbf{C}^2$ by left matrix multiplication, and we call this representation $\pi_1$. Then if we consider $S^m(\mathbf{C}^2)$, the $m$-fold symmetric tensor product of $\mathbf{C}^2$ with itself, we define $\pi_m = S^m(\pi_1)$, where each matrix $\pi_m(g)$ is the multilinear extension of $\pi_1(g) = g$ to $S^m(\mathbf{C}^2)$, and we note that $\dim S^m(\mathbf{C}^2) = m + 1$. The representation $\pi_m$ induces a derived representation $\

It is clear from these relations that any basis vector $v_{m,k}$ is expressible as powers of $\rho_m(X)$ and $\rho_m(Y)$ acting on $v_{m,0}$, which we see is a primitive vector of weight $m$. Thus $v_{m,0}$ generates $S^m(\mathbf{C}^2)$ by the action of $\rho_m$, and thus $\rho_m$ is irreducible, and hence equivalent to the representation in Theorem 3.8. In fact, if we set

$$\varphi_k = \rho_m(Y)^k v_{m,0},$$

we see that

$$\varphi_k = \frac{m!}{(m-k)!} v_{1,0}^{m-k} v_{1,1}^k,$$

from which follows the irreducibility.

Now let us compute the action of $w$, the Weyl element in $SL(2, \mathbf{C})$, on $\varphi_k$. We see that

$$\pi_m(w)\varphi_k = \frac{m!}{(m-k)!} \pi_m(w)(v_{1,0})^{m-k}(v_{1,1})^k$$

$$= \frac{m!}{(m-k)!} S^m(\pi_1(w))(v_{1,0})^{m-k}(v_{1,1})^k.$$

But

$$\pi_1(w)v_{1,0} = iv_{1,1}$$

$$\pi_1(w)v_{1,1} = iv_{1,0},$$

and hence

$$\pi_m(w)\varphi_k = i^m \frac{k!}{(m-k)!} \varphi_{m-k}.$$

Thus we obtain

(3.11) $$\pi_m(w)\rho_m(Y)^k \varphi_0 = i^m \frac{k!}{(m-k)!} \rho_m(Y)^{m-k} \varphi_0.$$

Now we note that the identity (3.11) which involves both the representation of $SL(2, \mathbf{C})$ and $\mathfrak{sl}(2, \mathbf{C})$ was derived from this particular explicit representation, but we see from its form that it will be valid on any irre

by setting

$$\alpha(X) = \Lambda, \quad \alpha(Y) = L, \quad \alpha(H) = B.$$

We see by Proposition 1.1 that $\alpha$ is indeed a representation of $SL(2, \mathbf{C})$, since the commutation relations $[B, L] = -2L, [B, \Lambda] = 2\Lambda$, and $[\Lambda, L] = B$ are easy to verify.

**Definition 3.10:** A $p$-form $\varphi \in \wedge^p F$ is said to be primitive if $\Lambda\varphi = 0$, i.e., if $\alpha(X)\varphi = 0$.

**Remark:** Recall that $B = \sum_{p=0}^{2n}(n-p)\Pi_p$, and thus any homogeneous form of degree $p$ is an eigenvector of $\alpha(H)$ of weight $n-p$. Hence a primitive $p$-form is a primitive vector for the representation $\alpha$ of weight $n-p$.

If $\varphi$ is a primitive $p$-form, then the action of $\alpha$ generates a subspace $F_\varphi \subset \wedge^F$ of dimension $n-p+1$ on which $\alpha$ acts irreducibly. Moreover, the action of $\alpha$ leaves the real forms $\wedge_R F$ invariant since $L, \Lambda$, and $B$ are real operators. The decomposition of $\wedge_R F$ into irreducible components is called the Lefschetz decomposition of the exterior algebra, and this is compatible with the decomposition $F = \oplus \wedge^{p,q} F$, since $L, \Lambda$, and $B$ are bihomogeneous operators. This is elaborated in the theorems which follow. By Proposition 3.1, we see that $\alpha$ induces a representation of $SL(2, \mathbf{C})$ on $\wedge^F$, for which we will use the notation $\pi_\alpha$. We can restrict $\pi_\alpha$ to $SU(2)$, and we observe that $\pi_\alpha|_{SU(2)}$ is unitary, which follows from the fact that $\alpha|_{\mathfrak{SU}(2)}$ are skew-Hermit

We will refer to the following theorem as the Lefschetz decomposition theorem for an Hermitian exterior algebra.

Theorem 3.12: Let $E$ be an Hermitian vector space of complex dimension $n$, and let $\varphi \in \wedge^p F$ be a $p$-form, then

(a) One can write $\varphi$ uniquely in the form

$$\varphi = \sum_{r \geq (p-n)^+} L^r \varphi_r,$$

where, for each $r \geq (p-n)^+$, $\varphi_r$ is a primitive $(p-2r)$-form. Moreover, each $\varphi_r$ can be expressed in the form

$$\varphi_r = \sum_{r,s} a_{r,s} L^s \Lambda^{r+s} \varphi, \quad a_{r,s} \in \mathbf{Q}.$$

(b) If $L^m \varphi = 0$, then the primitive $(p-2r)$-forms $\varphi_r$ appearing in the decomposition vanish if $r \geq (p-n+m)^+$, i.e.,

$$\varphi = \sum_{r=(p-n)^+}^{(p-n+m)^+} L^r \varphi_r,$$

(c) if $p \leq n$, and $L^{n-p} \varphi = 0$, then $\varphi = 0$.

Proof: The representation space $V = \wedge F$ of the representation $\alpha$ decomposes into a direct sum of irreducible subspaces $V = V_1 \oplus \cdots \oplus V_l$. Let $\varphi$ be a $p$-form, then

$$\varphi = \psi^1 + \cdots + \psi^l,$$

$\psi^j \in V_j$. Then each $\psi^j$ is an eigenvector of $\rho(H)$ of weight $n-p$, and hence by Corollary 3.9, we see that

$$\psi^j = L^{rj} \chi_j,$$

where $\chi_j$ is a primitive $(p-2r_j)$-form, and

$$\chi_j = c_j \Lambda^{rj} \psi^j, \quad c_j \in \mathbf{Q}

for a rational nonzero constant $c_k$, depending only on $p, k$ and $n$. Applying $\Lambda^m$ to (3.15) and using (3.16) we find that

$$0 = \Lambda^m \varphi_0 + \Lambda^{m-1}(\Lambda L) \varphi_1 + \cdots + \Lambda(\Lambda^{m-1} L^{m-1}) \varphi_{m-1} + \Lambda^m L^m \varphi_m,$$

which implies immediately that $\varphi_m = 0$, contradicting our assumption that $\varphi_m$ was primitive. Thus the decomposition (3.12) is unique.

To see that (3.13) holds we proceed in a similar manner. Let the $p$-form $\varphi$ have the decomposition

$$\varphi = \varphi_0 + L \varphi_1 + \cdots + L^m \varphi_m,$$

where $\varphi_j$ are primitive $(p-2j)$-forms. Then

$$\Lambda^m \varphi = \Lambda^m \varphi_0 + \Lambda^{m-1}(\Lambda L) \varphi_1 + \cdots + \Lambda^m L^m \varphi_m$$

$$= 0 + \cdots + 0 + c_m \varphi_m,$$

and so

$$\varphi_m = (1/c_m) \Lambda^m \varphi.$$

By induction from above, we get formulas of the type (3.13) for each $\varphi_j$, $j = 0, \ldots, m$.

Parts (b) and (c) follow simply from the uniqueness. Namely, for part (b), we see that

$$0 = L^m \varphi = \sum_{r \geq (p-n)^+} L^{m+r} \varphi_r.$$

Since $\varphi_r$ is primitive, it follows from Theorem 3.11 that $L^q \varphi_r = 0$ if $q \geq (n-(p-2r)+1)^+$, which implies that $L^{r+m} \varphi_r = 0$ if $r < (p-n+m)$. Thus we have

$$0 = \sum_{r \geq (p-n

Let $E$ now be an Hermitian vector space with fundamental form

$$\Omega = \sum_{\mu=1}^{n} x_{\mu} \wedge y_{\mu},$$

given by (1.9) where $\{x_{\mu}, y_{\mu}\}$ is an orthonormal basis for $E'$, as before. Now, if $\eta$ is any $p$-form in $\wedge F$, we let

$$e(\eta)\varphi := \eta \wedge \varphi$$

be the operator acting on $\wedge F$ given by wedging with $\eta$. If $\eta$ is a real 1-form, then we check easily that

(3.17) $$e^*(\eta) = *e(\eta)*,$$

and if $\{e_1, \ldots, e_{2n}\}$ is a real oriented orthonormal basis for $E'$, we see from Sec. 1 that

(3.18) $$e^*\left(e_{j_1}\right)\left(e_{j_1} \wedge \cdots \wedge e_{j_k}\right) = e_{j_2} \wedge \cdots \wedge e_{j_k},$$

if $j_1 \notin \{j_2, \ldots, j_k\}$, and 0 otherwise.

We note that

$$L = e(\Omega) = \sum_{\mu=1}^{n} e(x_{\mu})e(y_{\mu}),$$

$$\Lambda = e^*(\Omega) = \sum_{\mu=1}^{n} e^*\left(y_{\mu}\right)e^*\left(x_{\mu}\right).$$

It is clear that

(3.19) $$[L, e(\eta)] = 0, \quad \text{for any } \eta \in \wedge F,$$

since $\Omega$ is a 2-form. On the other hand, we claim that

(3.20) (a) $$[\Lambda, e(x_{\mu})] = e^*\left(y_{\mu}\right),$$

(b) $$[\Lambda, e(y_{\mu})] = -e^*\left(x_{\mu}\right),$$

for $\mu =

and also that

$$e^* (y_j) \psi = \psi_3 - x_j \wedge \psi_4,$$

so (3.20b) follows.

Now suppose that $\eta$ is a $(1, 0)$-form. Then

$$[\Lambda, e(\eta)] = -ie^*(\bar{\eta}),$$

$$[\Lambda, e(\bar{\eta})] = ie^*(\eta).$$

Moreover, if $\eta$ is a real 1-form, then

$$[\Lambda, e(\eta)] = -Je^*(\eta)J^{-1}.$$

We see that (3.22) follows from (3.20), since it suffices to consider the special case of $\eta = x_j + iy_j$. To see that (3.23) is true, we simply note that any real 1-form can be written in the form $\eta = \varphi + \bar{\varphi}$, where $\varphi$ is of type $(1, 0)$, and then one checks that

$$-ie^*(\bar{\eta}) = -Je^*(\bar{\eta})J^{-1},$$

$$ie^*(\eta) = -Je^*(\eta)J^{-1}.$$

With these preparations made, we now want to prove two basic lemmas due to Hecht [1]. We introduce the following operator on $\wedge F$ induced by the action of $SL(2, \mathbf{C})$ on $\wedge F$ by the representation $\pi_\alpha$. Let

$$\# = \pi_\alpha(w) = \exp\left(\frac{1}{2}i\pi\alpha(X + Y)\right) = \exp\left(\frac{1}{2}i\pi(\Lambda + L)\right).$$

The first lemma shows us that $\#$ is closely related to the $*$ operator.

**Lemma 3.14:** Let $\eta$ be a real 1-form. Then

$$\# e(\eta)#^{-1} = -iJe^*(\eta)J^{-1}.$$

**Proof:** We set, for $t \in \mathbf{C}$,

$$e_t(\eta) = \exp(it\alpha(X + Y)) \cdot e(\eta)

i.e., representations commute with the exponential mapping. In this case $\sigma$ is conjugation by $\pi_{\alpha}$, and $d\sigma$ is given by $ad(\alpha)$ (cf., Helgason [1] or Varadarajan [1]), and $ad\alpha(X + Y) = ad(\Lambda + L)$.

Now $ad^k(\Lambda + L)$ is a sum of monomials in $ad(\Lambda)$ and $ad(L)$. Since $\Lambda L = L\Lambda + B$, $ad(L)e(\eta) = 0$, and $ad(-B)e(\eta) = e(\eta)$ (since $\eta$ is of degree 1), we see that $e_t(\eta)$ can be expressed in the form

$$e_t(\eta) = \sum_{t=0}^{\infty} a_k(t)ad^k(\Lambda)e(\eta),$$

where $a_k(t)$ are real-analytic functions in $t$. Now (3.23) implies that $ad^k(\Lambda)e(\eta) = 0$, for $k \geq 2$, since $\Lambda$ commutes with $J$ and $e^*(\eta)$. Thus

(3.26) $$e_t(\eta) = a_0(t)e(\eta) + a_1(t)ad(\Lambda)e(\eta).$$

Let $f'(t)$ denote differentiation with respect to $t$. Then we see, by differentiating (3.25), that $e_t(\eta)$ satisfies the differential equation

(3.27) (a) $$e'_t(\eta) = i(ad(\Lambda) + ad(L))e_t(\eta).$$
(b) $$e_0(\eta) = e(\eta).$$

We can solve (3.27) by using (3.26). Namely, we have

(3.28) $$e_t(\eta) = a'_0(t)e(\eta) + a'_1(t)ad(\Lambda)e(\eta)$$

must equal

$$i(ad(\Lambda + L))[a_0(t)e(\eta) + a_1(t)ad(\Lambda)e(\eta)]$$

$$= ia_0

Lemma 3.15: Let $\varphi \in \wedge^p F$, then

$$\ast \varphi = i^{p^2-n} J^{-1} \ast \varphi.$$

Proof: The $\ast$-operator satisfies

(3.30) $$\ast 1 = \text{vol} = (1/n!) L^n(1),$$

(3.31) $$\ast e(\eta) = (-1)^p e^*(\eta)*,$$

as an operator on $\wedge^p F$ for any real 1-form $\eta$. Relation (3.30) is clear. To see (3.31), let $\varphi \in \wedge^p F$, and write

$$\ast e(\eta) \varphi = \ast e(\eta) \ast^{-1} \varphi = (-1)^{2n-p} e^*(\eta)*\varphi.$$

Now $\ast$ is the only linear operator on $\wedge F$ satisfying both (3.30) and (3.31), as the forms obtained from 1 by repeated application of $e(\eta)$ span $\wedge F$. Now let

$$\tilde{\ast} = i^{p^2-n} J^{-1} \ast$$

be an operator defined on $\wedge^p F$. We recall from (3.11) that

(3.32) $$\#\alpha(Y)^k \varphi_0 = i^m \frac{k!}{(m-k)!} \alpha(Y)^{m-k} \varphi_0,$$

where $\varphi_0$ is primitive of weight $m$. But $\varphi_0 = 1$ is a primitive 0-form of weight $n$, so we have, using (3.32) for $k = 0$,

$$\# 1 = (i^n/n!) L^n(1).$$

Thus

$$\tilde{\ast} 1 = i^{-n}(i^n/n!) L^n(1) = \text{vol}.$$

Similarly, if $\eta \in \wedge^1_R F$, and $\varphi \in \wedge^p F$, we see that

$$\tilde{\ast} e(\eta) \varphi = i

Then $\pi_\alpha|_{F_\varphi}$ is an irreducible representation of $SL(2, \mathbf{C})$, and we see by (3.32) that

$$\#L^r \varphi = i^{n-p} \frac{r!}{(n-p-r)!} L^{n-p-r} \varphi.$$

Hence, by Lemma 3.15,

$$\begin{aligned* L^r \varphi &= i^{(p+2r)^2-n} J^{-1} \#L^r \varphi \\ &= i^{p^2-n} J^{-1} i^{n-p} \frac{r!}{(n-p-r)!} L^{n-p-r} \varphi \\ &= i^{p^2-p} (J^{-1})^2 \frac{r!}{(n-p-r)!} L^{n-p-r} J \varphi \\ &= i^{p^2-p} (-1)^p \frac{r!}{(n-p-r)!} L^{n-p-r} J \varphi \\ &= (-1)^{p(p+1)/2} \frac{r!}{(n-p-r)!} L^{n-p-r} J \varphi. \end{aligned}$$

Q.E.D.

4. Differential Operators on a Kähler Manifold

Let $X$ be a Hermitian complex manifold with Hermitian metric $h$. Then there is associated to $X$ and $h$ a fundamental form $\Omega$, which at each point $x \in X$ is the form of type (1, 1), which is the fundamental form associated as in (1.5) with the Hermitian bilinear form

$$h_x: T_x(X) \times T_x(X) \longrightarrow \mathbf{C},$$

given by the Hermitian metric.

Definition 4.1: A Hermitian metric $h$ on $X$ is called a Kähler metric if the fundamental form $\Omega$ associated with $h$ is closed; i.e., $d\Omega = 0$.

Definition 4.2:

(a) A complex manifold $X$ is said to be of Kähler type if it admits at least one Kähler metric.

(b) A complex manifold equipped with a K

fundamental form is then, in this notation,

$$\Omega = \frac{i}{2} \sum h_{\mu\nu}(z) dz_{\mu} \wedge d\bar{z}_{\nu}.$$

In the notation of Chap. III,

$$h_{\mu\nu}(z) = h \left( \frac{\partial}{\partial z_{\mu}}, \frac{\partial}{\partial z_{\nu}} \right)(z).$$

Let us first give some examples of Kähler manifolds.

**Example 4.3:** Let $X = \mathbf{C}^n$ and let $h = \sum_{\mu=1}^{n} dz_{\mu} \otimes d\bar{z}_{\mu}$. Then

$$\Omega = \frac{i}{2} \sum_{\mu=1}^{n} dz_{\mu} \wedge d\bar{z}_{\mu} = \sum_{\mu=1}^{n} dx_{\mu} \wedge dy_{\mu},$$

where $z_{\mu} = x_{\mu} + iy_{\mu}$, $\mu = 1, \ldots, n$, is the usual notation for real and imaginary coordinates. Then, clearly, $d\Omega = 0$, since $\Omega$ has constant coefficients, and hence $h$ is a Kähler metric on $\mathbf{C}^n$.

**Example 4.4:** Let $\omega_1, \ldots, \omega_{2n}$ be $2n$ vectors in $\mathbf{C}^n$ which are linearly independent over $\mathbf{R}$ and let $\Gamma$ be the lattice consisting of all integral linear combinations of $\{\omega_1, \ldots, \omega_{2n}\}$. The lattice $\Gamma$ acts in a natural way on $\mathbf{C}^n$ by translation, $z \rightarrow \gamma + z$, if $\gamma \in \Gamma$. Let $X = \mathbf{C}^n/\Gamma$ be the set of equivalence classes with respect to $\Gamma$, where we say that $z$ and $w$ are equivalent with respect to $\Gamma$ if $z = w + \gamma$ for some $\gamma \in \Gamma$. By giving $X$ the usual quotient topology, we see that $X

where we have let $|\xi|^2 = \xi_0^2 + \cdots + \xi_n^2$, as usual. This form is the homogeneous representation for the curvature form of the universal bundle over $P_n$ with the standard metric on the frame bundle [except for sign; see equation (4.3) in Chap. III]. In particular, then, $\tilde{\Omega}$ defines a $d$-closed differential form $\Omega$ on $P_n$ of type (1, 1). In terms of local coordinates in a particular coordinate system, for example,

$$w_j = \frac{\xi_j}{\xi_0}, \quad j = 1, \ldots, n,$$

we can write $\Omega$ as

$$\Omega(w) = \frac{i}{2} \frac{(1 + |w|^2) \sum_{\mu=1}^{n} dw_\mu \wedge d\bar{w}_\mu - \sum_{\mu,v=1}^{n} \bar{w}_\mu w_v dw_\mu \wedge d\bar{w}_v}{(1 + |w|^2)^2}$$

Thus the associated tensor

$$h = \left( \sum h_{\mu\nu}(w) dw_\mu \otimes d\bar{w}_v \right)(1 + |w|^2)^{-2}$$

has for coefficients (ignoring the positive denominator above)

$$h_{\mu\nu}(w) = (1 + |w|^2) \delta_{\mu\nu} - \bar{w}_\mu w_v, \quad \mu, \nu = 1, \ldots, n.$$

It is easy to see that $\tilde{h} = [h_{\mu\nu}]$ is Hermitian symmetric and positive definite. In fact, suppose that $u \in C^n$. Then

$$^t \bar{u}\tilde{h}u = \sum_{\mu,v} h_{\mu\nu} u_\mu \bar{u}_v = \sum_{\mu,v} (1 + |w|^2) \delta_{\mu\nu} u_\mu \bar{u}_v - \left( \sum_{\mu} \bar{w}_\mu u_\mu \right

In terms of the differential operators $d$, $\partial$, and $\bar{\partial}$ on a Hermitian manifold, we can define the following Laplacian operators,

$$\Delta = dd^* + d^*d$$
$$\Box = \partial \partial^* + \partial^*\partial$$
$$\Box = \bar{\partial}\bar{\partial}^* + \bar{\partial}^*\bar{\partial},$$

of which the first and last will play an important role in our study of Kähler manifolds later in this chapter. Note that $\Box$ is the complex conjugate of the operator $\Box$, thus justifying the notation. What can we say about the relation between the Laplacians $\Delta$ and $\Box$? In general, not too much,† but on Kähler manifolds there is a striking relationship. Recall that an operator $P: \mathcal{E}^*(X) \to \mathcal{E}^*(X)$ is said to be real if $\overline{P\varphi} = P\bar{\varphi}$, i.e., $P = \bar{P}$.

Theorem 4.7: Let $X$ be a Kähler manifold.‡ If the differential operators $d, d^*, \bar{\partial}, \bar{\partial}^*, \partial, \partial^*, \Box, \Box$, and $\Delta$ are defined with respect to the Kähler metric on $X$, then $\Delta$ commutes with $*, d$, and $L$, and

$$\Delta = 2\Box = 2\Box.$$

In particular,

(a) $\Box$ and $\Box$ are real operators.
(b) $\Delta|_{\mathcal{E}^{p,q}}: \mathcal{E}^{p,q} \to \mathcal{E}^{p,q}$.

Remark: Neither (a) nor (b) of the above theorem are true in general and these properties will imply topological restrictions on Kähler manifolds, as we shall see in the next section.

To prove Theorem 4.7, we shall first develop some consequences of the representation theory from Sec. 3 as applied to the study of the interaction of the operators $d$ and $\partial$ and their adjoints. The operators $L$ and $L^*$ will

a twisted conjugate to $d$. These are real operators which are useful in applications involving integration and Stokes’ theorem, and this is one reason for introducing them. For instance, if we let $d_c$ act on a function $\varphi$, we have

$$d_c \varphi = w J d J \varphi$$

$$= (-1) J (\partial \varphi + \bar{\partial} \varphi)$$

$$= (-1) (i \partial \varphi - i \bar{\partial} \varphi)$$

$$= -i (\partial - \bar{\partial}) \varphi,$$

and we could use this last expression for $d_c$ as a definition. From $d_c = -i (\partial - \bar{\partial})$, it follows immediately that

(4.1) $$dd_c = 2i \partial \bar{\partial},$$

which is a real operator of type (1, 1) acting on differential forms in $\mathcal{E}^*(X)$.

We now have an important theorem concerning the commutators of these various operators.

**Theorem 4.8:** Let $X$ be a Kähler manifold. Then

(a) $[L, d] = 0, [L^*, d^*] = 0$.

(b) $[L, d^*] = d_c, [L^*, d] = -d_c^*$.

**Proof:** Part (a) is simple and follows from the fact that the fundamental form $\Omega$ on $X$ is closed, the basic Kähler assumption. The second part of (a) is the adjoint form of the first part. Similarly, the second part of (b) is the adjoint statement of the first part, and the first statement holds if and only if the second statement holds. Let us show then that

$$L^* d - d L^* = -J^{-1} d^* J.$$

Letting $L^* = \Lambda$ as before, we see by Proposition 2.3 that

$$d^* = (-1)^{p+1} * d^*^{-1},$$ acting on $p$-forms.

Now let $\varphi$ be a $p$-form on $X$; then we find that, from Lemma 3.15,

$$\#\varphi = i

Just as in the proof of Lemma 3.14, we have

$$d_t = \sum_{k=0}^{\infty} (1/k!) ad^k [it(\Lambda + L)] d$$

and, since $ad(L)d = 0$, by the Kähler hypothesis,

(4.3) $$d_t = \sum_{k=0}^{\infty} a_k(t) ad^k (\Lambda) d,$$

where $a_k(t)$ are real-analytic functions of $t$. Now $d_{\pi/2}$ is an operator of degree $-1$, which implies that

(4.4) $$d_{\pi/2} = a_1(\pi/2) ad(\Lambda) d,$$

since all other terms in the expansion (4.3) are operators of degree $+1, -3, -5, \ldots$, etc., and the expansion clearly has only a finite number of nonzero terms. But then it follows from (4.2) and (4.4) that $iJd^*J^{-1}$ is proportional to $ad(\Lambda)d$, and hence that $ad^k(\Lambda)d = 0$ for $k \geq 2$, since $\Lambda$ commutes with $d^*$ and $J$. Thus

$$d_t = a_0(t)d + a_1(t)ad(\Lambda)d,$$

and just as in the proof of Lemma 3.14, we conclude that

$$d_t = (\cos t)d + i(\sin t)ad(\Lambda)d,$$

and now the theorem follows by letting $t = \pi/2$ and observing that $Jd^*J^{-1} = -J^{-1}d^*J$.

Q.E.D.

Corollary 4.9: Let $X$ be a Kähler manifold. Then

$$[L, d_c] = 0, \quad [L^*, d_c^*] = 0, \quad [L, d_c^*] = -d, \quad \text{and} \quad [L^*, d_c] = d^*.$$

Proof: This follows easily from Theorem 4.8, since the operator $J$ commutes with the real operators,

Proof: Equations (4.5) follow from Theorem 4.8 by comparing bidegrees and using the fact that $d_c = i(\bar{\partial} - \partial)$.

To obtain (4.6) we use, for example, $d^* = [L^*, d_c]$ as follows:

$$d^*d_c = L^*d_cd_c - d_cL^*d_c = -d_cL^*d_c$$
$$-d_cd^* = -d_cL^*d_c + d_cd_cL^* = -d_cL^*d_c,$$

and so

$$d^*d_c = -d_cL^*d_c = -d_cd^*.$$

Similarly for the others, setting $d_c = [L, d^*]$, etc.

Q.E.D.

Using the above results, we are now in a position to prove Theorem 4.7 concerning the Laplacians on a Kähler manifold.

Proof of Theorem 4.7: It is clear from the definition of $d^*$ and $\Delta$ that $\Delta$ commutes with $d$ and *. So we have to see that $L\Delta - \Delta L$ vanishes. We have

$$\Delta L - L\Delta = dd^*L + d^*dL - Ldd^* - Ld^*d$$
$$= dd^*L + d^*Ld - dLd^* - Ld^*d$$
$$= -d[L, d^*] - [L, d^*]d,$$

and substituting, from Theorem 4.8, we obtain

$$\Delta L - L\Delta = -dd_c - d_cd.$$

It follows from (4.1) that $dd_c = -d_cd$, since $\partial \bar{\partial} + \bar{\partial} \partial = 0$; thus we obtain $\Delta L - L\Delta = 0$.

To prove the relationship between $\Delta$ and the other Laplacians, we write, using Corollary 4.9,

$$\Delta = dd^* + d^*d = d[L^*, d_c] + [L^*, d_c

By (4.6) in Corollary 4.10, we see that the last two parentheses vanish. We also have

$$\Delta_c = J^{-1} \Delta J = J^{-1} dd^* J + J^{-1} d^* dJ$$
$$= d_c d_c^* + d_c^* d_c.$$

Therefore we have

$$4 \Box = \Delta + \Delta_c + 0$$
$$= 2 \Delta.$$

Thus, $2 \Box = \Delta$. The other assertion is proved in a similar manner. The fact that $\Delta$ is of bidegree $(0, 0)$ follows now trivially from the fact that $\Box$ is of bidegree $(0, 0)$. Similarly, since $\Delta$ is a real operator, $\Box$ and $\overline{\Box}$ must also be real operators.

Q.E.D.

Corollary 4.11: On a Kähler manifold, the operator $\Delta$ commutes with $J$, $L^*, d, \partial, \bar{\partial}, \partial^*$, and $d^*$.

Since $L^*$ commutes with $\Delta$ on a Kähler manifold, we have an analogue to Theorem 3.12. On a Kähler manifold $X$, $\Delta$-harmonic differential forms are the same as, by Theorem 4.7, $\Box$-harmonic or $\overline{\Box}$-harmonic forms, and we shall say simply harmonic forms on $X$, to be denoted by $\mathcal{H}^r(X)$ and $\mathcal{H}^{p,q}(X)$ as before. We shall denote by $\mathcal{H}_0^r(X)$ and $\mathcal{H}_0^{p,q}(X)$ the primitive harmonic $r$-forms and $(p, q)$-forms, respectively; i.e., $\mathcal{H}_0^r(X)$ is the kernel of the mapping $L^*: \mathcal{H}^r(X) \rightarrow \mathcal{H}^{r-2}(X)$ and $\mathcal{H}_0^{p,q}(X)$ is the kernel of the mapping $L^*: \mathcal{H}^{p,q}(X) \right

Proof: This is an immediate consequence of part (c) of the Lefschetz decomposition theorem (Theorem 3.12), where we represent the cohomology groups by harmonic forms as in Corollary 4.12.

Q.E.D.

Remark: The basic result of this section is Theorem 4.7, and we shall develop its consequences in the next section. The derivation of this result was based on Theorem 4.8 and its corollaries, and this depended in turn on the representation theory of Sec. 3. However, the statement of Theorem 4.7 does not involve the representation theory, and there are alternative methods of deriving Theorem 4.8 (from which then follows Theorem 4.7) which do not involve this concept. One basic approach is the following one. Suppose that

$$\Omega = \frac{i}{2} \sum h_{\mu v}(z) dz_{\mu} \wedge d\bar{z}_v$$

is the fundamental form on a Kähler manifold for $z$ near 0 in some appropriate coordinate system. By a linear change of coordinates, one can obtain easily that the matrix $h(z) = [h_{\mu v}(z)]$ is the identity at $z = 0$

$$h_{\mu v}(0) = \delta_{\mu v}$$

or

$$h(z) = I + O(|z|).$$

By using the fact that $d\Omega = 0$, one finds easily that the coefficient matrix satisfies the differential equations

$$\frac{\partial h_{\mu v}}{\partial z_{\lambda}}(z) = \frac{\partial h_{\lambda v}}{\partial z_{\mu}}(z), \quad \mu, v, \lambda = 1, \ldots, n$$

(4.7)

$$\frac{\partial h_{\mu v}}{\partial \bar{z}_{\lambda}}(z) = \frac{\partial h_{\mu \lambda}}{\partial \bar{z}_v}(z), \quad \mu, v, \lambda = 1, \ldots, n.$$

By making a new (quadratic) change of variables of the form

$$\tilde{z}_{\mu} = z_{\mu} + \frac{1}{2

of combinatoric multilinear algebra similar to that developed in Sec. 1 in going back and forth between the real and complex structures.

One can also prove the Lefschetz decomposition theorem for differential forms on a Kähler manifold independent of the representation theory of $\mathfrak{sl}(2, \mathbf{C})$, per se, and then use this to prove the basic Kähler identities. This is the approach followed by Weil [1].

5. The Hodge Decomposition Theorem on Compact Kähler Manifolds

In this section we shall derive the Hodge decomposition theorem for Kähler manifolds and give various applications. Let $X$ be a compact complex manifold. Then we have the de Rham groups on $X$, $\{H^r(X, \mathbf{C})\}$, represented by $d$-closed differential forms with complex coefficients, and the Dolbeault groups on $X$, $\{H^{p,q}(X)\}$, represented by $\bar{\partial}$-closed $(p, q)$-forms (Sec. 3 in Chap. II). We have seen that these vector spaces are finite dimensional (Sec. 5 in Chap. IV). Moreover, there is a spectral sequence relating them (Fröhlicher [1]). However, in general, if $\varphi$ is a $\bar{\partial}$-closed $(p, q)$-form on $X$, then $\varphi$ need not be $d$-closed, and, conversely, if $\psi$ is a $d$-closed $r$-form on $X$ and $\psi = \psi^{r,0} + \psi^{r-1,1} + \cdots + \psi^{0,r}$ are the bihomogeneous components of $\psi$, then the components $\psi^{p,q}$ need not be $\bar{\partial}$-closed. On manifolds of Kähler type, however, such relations are valid, as we see in the following decomposition theorem of Hodge (as amplified by Kodaira).

Theorem 5.1: Let $X$ be a compact complex manifold of Kähler type. Then there is a direct sum decomposition†

(5.1) $H^r(X, \mathbf{C}) = \sum_{p+q=r} H^{p,

Since $\Box$ preserves bidegree, we see that $\Box\varphi = 0$ implies that $\Box\varphi^{r,0} = \cdots = \Box\varphi^{0,r} = 0$, and therefore there is a mapping

$$\tau: \mathcal{H}^r(X) \rightarrow \sum_{p+q=r} \mathcal{H}^{p,q}(X)$$

given by $\varphi \rightarrow (\varphi^{r,0}, \ldots, \varphi^{0,r})$. The mapping is clearly injective, and, moreover, if $\varphi \in \mathcal{H}^{p,q}(X)$, then $\Box\varphi = \frac{1}{2}\Delta\varphi = 0$, which implies that $\varphi \in \mathcal{H}^{p+q}(X)$, and thus $\tau$ is surjective, proving (4.1).

Assertion (5.2) follows immediately from the fact that $\Box$ is real (Theorem 4.7) and that conjugation is an isomorphism from $\mathcal{E}^{p,q}(X)$ to $\mathcal{E}^{q,p}(X)$.

Q.E.D.

Remark: One can also prove Theorem 5.1 by showing that the spectral sequence relating the Dolbeault and de Rham groups degenerates at the $E_1$ term (see Fröhlicher [1] and the appendix to Griffiths [4]). This proof also makes heavy use of the differential operators $\Delta$, $\Box$ and the harmonic representation of the de Rham and Dolbeault groups. This approach, via spectral sequences, deserves mention because there are examples, namely $K-3$ surfaces† where one does not know (yet) whether they are Kähler in general or not.‡ However, one can show by other means that the spectral sequence degenerates, and one still obtains a Hodge decomposition, and this in turn is useful in the study of the moduli problem for $K-3$ surfaces.

As a consequence of the Hodge decomposition theorem, we have the following relations for the Betti numbers and Hodge numbers of a Kähler manifold. Recall that we set (see Sec. 5 in Chap. IV)

$$b_r(X) = \

The simplest example of a non-Kähler compact complex manifold is given by a Hopf surface, which we shall now construct. First, we recall one of the basic ways of constructing compact complex manifolds in general, namely, "dividing a given manifold by a group of automorphisms," an example being the complex tori considered in Sec. 4. Let $X$ be a complex manifold and let $\Gamma$ be a subgroup of the group of automorphisms of $X$ (an automorphism of $X$ is a biholomorphic self-mapping of $X$ onto itself). We say that $\Gamma$ is properly discontinuous if for any two compact sets $K_1, K_2 \subset X, \gamma(K_1) \cap K_2 \neq \emptyset$, for only a finite number of elements $\gamma \in \Gamma$. The group $\Gamma$ is said to have no fixed points if for each $\gamma \in \Gamma - \{e\}$ (e = identity in $\Gamma$) $\gamma(x) \neq x$ for all $x \in X$. We let $X/\Gamma$ be the set of equivalence classes with respect to the action of the group $\Gamma$; i.e., $x$ and $y \in X$ are equivalent (with respect to $\Gamma$) if $x = \gamma(y)$ for some $\gamma \in \Gamma$. Let $X/\Gamma$ have the natural quotient topology given as follows: A basis for the open sets in $X/\Gamma$ is given by the projection of the open sets in $X$ under the natural projection mapping $\pi: X \rightarrow X/\Gamma$.

**Proposition 5.3:** Let $X$ be a complex manifold and let $\Gamma$ be a properly discontinuous group of automorphisms of $X$ without fixed points. Then $X/\Gamma$ is a Hausdorff topological space which can be given uniquely a complex structure, so that the natural projection mapping $\pi: X \rightarrow X/\Gamma$ is a holomorphic mapping, which is locally biholomorphic.

**Proof:** Let $N$ be any compact neighborhood of a point $x_0 \in X$. Then there exists only finitely many elements $\gamma \in \Gamma$ so

Classical examples of complex manifolds constructed in this manner are

(a) Riemann surfaces of genus $g = 1$ (elliptic curves), where $X = \mathbf{C}$ and $\Gamma$ is a two-dimensional lattice in $\mathbf{C}$ generated by two periods independent over $\mathbf{R}$.

(b) Complex tori (see Example 4.4). (a) is a complex torus of one complex dimension.

(c) Riemann surfaces of genus $g > 1$, where $X = \text{unit disc in } \mathbf{C}$ and $\Gamma$ is a properly discontinuous fixed point free subgroup of the group of automorphisms of $X$ (which are all fractional-linear transformations of the unit disc onto itself, i.e., Möbius transformations).

Remark: If we omitted the assumption that $\Gamma$ had no fixed points in Proposition 5.3, then $X/\Gamma$ can still be given a complex structure as a complex space (a generalization of a complex manifold) with singularities at the image of the fixed points (see Cartan [1] for a proof of this).

To construct an example of a Hopf surface, we proceed as follows. Consider the 3-sphere $S^3$ defined by $\{z = (z_1, z_2) \in \mathbf{C}^2 : |z_1|^2 + |z_2|^2 = 1\}$, and then we observe that there is a diffeomorphism

$$f: S^3 \times \mathbf{R} \xrightarrow{\cong} \mathbf{C}^2 - \{0\}$$

given by

$$f(z_1, z_2, t) = (e^t z_1, e^t z_2)$$

for $(z_1, z_2) \in S^3 \subset \mathbf{C}^2, t \in \mathbf{R}$ (i.e., we are shrinking and expanding $S^3$ in $\mathbf{C}^2$ by the parameter $t$ exponentially). The infinite cyclic group $\mathbf{Z}$ acts on $S^3 \times \mathbf{R}$ in a natural manner, namely,

$$(z_1, z_2, t) \rightarrow

where the vertical arrows are the natural projections. By Proposition 5.3 we see that $X$ is a complex manifold which is diffeomorphic under $\tilde{f}$ to $S^3 \times S^1$ (and this is compact). An integral basis for the homology of $S^3 \times S^1$ is given by the factors $S^1, S^3$ in those dimensions, and we have the Betti numbers

$$b_0(X) = b_1(X) = b_3(X) = b_4(X) = 1$$

$$b_2(X) = 0.$$

In particular, $b_1(X) = 1$, and hence $X$ cannot be Kähler, since odd degree Betti numbers must be even on Kähler manifolds. A deep result of Kodaira [4] asserts that any compact complex manifold which is homeomorphic to $S^1 \times S^3$ is of the form $(\mathbf{C}^2 - \{0\})/\Gamma$ for some appropriate $\Gamma$ chosen in a manner similar to that of our example. Such manifolds are called Hopf surfaces.

We would like to give one last important example of Kähler manifolds.

**Theorem 5.4:** Every complex manifold $X$ of complex dimension 1 (a Riemann surface) is of Kähler type.

**Proof:** Let $g$ be an arbitrary Hermitian metric on $X$. Then it suffices to show that this metric is indeed a Kähler metric. But this is trivial, since the associated fundamental form $\Omega$ is of type $(1, 1)$ and therefore of total degree 2 on $X$. Since $X$ has two real dimensions, it follows that $d\Omega = 0$, since there are no forms of higher degree.

Q.E.D.

Suppose that $X$ is a compact Riemann surface. Then we have, by the Hodge decomposition theorem for Kähler manifolds,

$$H^1(X, \mathbf{C}) = H^{1,0}(X) \oplus H^{0,1}(X).$$

Moreover, $h^{1,0}(X) = h^{0,1}(X)$, and hence

cohomology classes, where we mean by this the following: If $\varphi, \psi \in Z^*(X, \mathbf{C})$, the $d$-closed differential forms, and $[\varphi], [\psi]$ are the classes of $\varphi$ and $\psi$ in $H^*(X, \mathbf{C})$, then $[\varphi] \wedge [\psi]$ is defined by $[\varphi] \wedge \psi$, and it is easy to verify that this cohomology product is well defined and, moreover, satisfies $\xi \wedge \eta = (-1)^{\deg \xi \cdot \deg \eta} \eta \wedge \xi$. If $\Omega$ is the fundamental form on $X$, let $\omega = [\Omega]$; then we define

$$L: H^*(X, \mathbf{C}) \rightarrow H^*(X, \mathbf{C})$$

by $L(\xi) = \omega \wedge \xi$. Thus the Kähler structure on $X$ determines the linear mapping $L$ on cohomology. However, the mapping $L$ depends only on the class $\omega$ and not on the differential form representing it (nor on the metric inducing $\Omega$); any cohomologous differential form would give the same result. The existence of a Kähler metric therefore implies the existence of a linear mapping $L: H^*(X, \mathbf{C}) \rightarrow H^*(X, \mathbf{C})$, which is real, i.e., $L$ is actually defined on $H^*(X, \mathbf{R})$, and, moreover, the above Lefschetz decomposition (5.1) holds. The primitive cohomology classes $H^r_o(X, \mathbf{C}) \subset H^r(X, \mathbf{C})$ are those satisfying $L^{n-r+1}\xi = 0$, as before. The point we wish to make here is that the existence of $L$ and of the decomposition (6.1) is a topological necessity that a (say, differentiable or topological) manifold admit a Kähler complex structure. This is analogous to and related to the requirement that odd degree Betti numbers must be even for Kähler manifolds

an intuitive and geometric point of view. Suppose that $\dim_R X = 2$. Then we have, for $H^1(X, \mathbf{R})$,

$$Q(\xi, \eta) = -\int_X \xi \wedge \eta,$$

since $H^1(X, \mathbf{R}) = H_0^1(X, \mathbf{R})$ and $n = r = 1$. Thus, if $\{\xi_\alpha\}$ is a real basis for $H^1(X, \mathbf{R})$ and if we let $\{\hat{\xi}_\alpha\}$ be a dual basis for $H^1(X, \mathbf{R}) \ast \cong H_1(X, \mathbf{R})$, then $\{\hat{\xi}_\alpha\}$ can be represented by geometric 1-cycles on $X$, which in turn can be represented by an algebraic sum of oriented closed curves $\Gamma_\alpha$ on $X$. Then the matrix $Q(\xi_\alpha, \xi_\beta) = Q_{\alpha\beta}$ can be represented by (and is the same as) the intersection matrix $(\Gamma_\alpha \cdot \Gamma_\beta)$, which is defined by $\Gamma_\alpha \cdot \Gamma_\beta = \text{the algebraic sum of the number of intersections of } \Gamma_\alpha \text{ with } \Gamma_\beta$, assuming that they are in general position, meeting only in a finite number of points. The sign of the intersection number is given by whether the local orientation of the intersecting curves agrees or disagrees with the orientation of $X$. This was, in fact, the context in which Lefschetz worked (see Lefschetz [1] or Hodge [1], where higher-dimensional intersections are also considered). The interaction between the two points of view is very important (especially in algebraic geometry), but in this book we shall restrict ourselves primarily to a discussion of the cohomology groups $H^*(X, \mathbf{C})$, defined by differential forms, and deduce what we can from the existence of a Kähler metric and other considerations.

Suppose now that $X$ is a compact Kähler manifold with fundamental form $\Omega$ and that we have the Lefschetz decomposition as given by (6.1) and the quadr

would have the product of the matrices, and since the composition is a positive definite Hermitian symmetric form, it must have a nonzero determinant. Thus $Q$ must have a nonzero determinant with respect to some basis and hence is nonsingular.

To show property (d), we note that we can rewrite

$$Q(\xi, J\eta) = \sum_{s \geq (r-n)^+} c_s \int_X L^s \xi_s \wedge *L^s \eta_s,$$

where the $\{c_s\}$ are positive constants. This follows from Theorem 3.16. Namely, in this case we have (recall that degree $\eta_s = r - 2s$)

$$*L^s \eta_s = (-1)^{[r(r+1)/2]+s} c_{r,s} L^{n-r+s} J\eta_s,$$

where $c_{r,s}$ is a positive constant. Thus we obtain, with $c_s > 0$,

$$Q(\xi, J\bar{\xi}) = \sum_{s \geq (r-n)^+} c_s \int_X L^s \xi_s \wedge *L^s \bar{\xi}_s,$$

and this is $> 0$ since $\xi \neq 0$ implies at least one of the $L^s \xi_s \neq 0$ and hence the sum is positive, by the positive definite nature of the Hodge inner product.

The proofs for properties (b) and (c) are similar and will be omitted.

Q.E.D.

Property (a) in Theorem 6.1 tells us that $Q$ is either symmetric or skew-symmetric depending on whether $Q$ is acting on cohomology of even or odd degree. It is well known from linear algebra that there are canonical forms for such quadratic forms. Namely, for $r$ odd, there exists a basis $\{\xi_\alpha\}$ for $H^r(X, \mathbf{R})$ so that if we let $Q(\xi_\alpha, \xi_\beta) = Q_{\alpha\beta}$, then the matrix $[Q_{\alpha\beta}]$ has the form

$$[Q_{\alpha\beta}] = \begin{

Let us compute the primitive cohomology of a simple space, $X = \mathbf{P}_n(\mathbf{C})$. We have seen before that

$$b_0(\mathbf{P}_n) = \cdots = b_{2n}(\mathbf{P}_n) = 1$$

$$b_1(\mathbf{P}_n) = \cdots = b_{2n-1}(\mathbf{P}_n) = 0,$$

as is most easily seen by a cell decomposition, and the generators of the homology groups are given by $0 = \mathbf{P}_0 \subset \cdots \subset \mathbf{P}_n$. The cohomology groups $H^*(\mathbf{P}_n, \mathbf{C})$ have as basis elements $1, \omega, \omega^2, \ldots, \omega^n$, where $\Omega$ is the fundamental form of $\mathbf{P}_n$ and $[\Omega] = \omega$ is the class of $\Omega$ in $H^2(\mathbf{P}_n, \mathbf{C})$; i.e.,

$$H^*(\mathbf{X}, \mathbf{C}) = \mathbf{C} \oplus \mathbf{C}\omega \oplus \mathbf{C}\omega^2 \oplus \cdots \oplus \mathbf{C}\omega^n,$$

where $\mathbf{C}\omega^m$ represents the complex vector space spanned by the $(m, m)$ class $\omega^m$ in $H^{2m}(X, \mathbf{C})$. We claim that the only primitive cohomology classes in $H^*(\mathbf{P}_n, \mathbf{C})$ are the constants, i.e., $H_0^0(\mathbf{P}_n, \mathbf{C}) \cong \mathbf{C}, H_0^{2m}(\mathbf{P}_n, \mathbf{C}) = 0, m = 1, \ldots, n$. This follows from the fact that $\omega$ is not primitive, since

$$\omega^{n-2r+1} \wedge \omega^r = \omega^{n-r+1} \neq 0 \quad \text{if} \quad r

decomposition of $P_n$ (assuming that the intersecting manifold $X$ and $P_j$ are in general position). This determines part of the homology of $X$; the remainder of the homology, which is not so determined, is the primitive part (or as Lefschetz called them, effective cycles). In the case of a complex surface $X \subset P_3$, then, $X \cap P_2$ is (generically) a real two-dimensional closed submanifold, which is a cycle in $H_2(X, Z)$, which corresponds in cohomology to $\omega \in H^2(X, Z)$ (since $\omega$ is, in this case, an integral cohomology class). Again, we shall not formally prove this correspondence; we merely mention it as motivation for the discussion at hand.

Proof of Proposition 6.2: The proposition is clearly true for $r = 0, 1$, and so we shall prove it by induction for general $r$. Suppose that $b_o^q = b_q - b_{q-2}$ for $q = 0, \ldots, r-1$. Then let $\{\xi_i^{(j)}\}$ be a basis for $H_o^{r-2j}(X, C)$, $i = 1, \ldots, b_{r-2j} - b_{r-2j-2}$, $j = 1, \ldots, [r/2](b_q = 0$, for $q < 0$, by definition), and consider the set $\{L^j \xi_i^{(j)}\}$ of classes in $H^r(X, C)$. We claim that these vectors are linearly independent. Suppose that

$$\sum_{ij} \alpha_{ij} L^j \xi_i^{(j)} = 0, \quad \alpha_{ij} \in C,$$

Then we have

$$0 = \sum_j L^j \left( \sum_i \alpha_{ij} \xi_i^{(j)} \right),$$

and by the uniqueness of primitive decomposition, we obtain $\sum_i \alpha_{ij} \xi_i^{(j)} = 0$, $j = 1, \ldots, [r/2]$. By the linear independence

Hodge, which generalizes a theorem of Riemann for the case $n = r = 1$ (in which case primitive cohomology coincides with cohomology).

To simplify the notation we let $P^n(X, \mathbf{C}) = H^n_o(X, \mathbf{C})$ and $P^{p,q}(X) = H^{p,q}_o(X, \mathbf{C})$ denote primitive cohomology, and by definition $P_n(X, \mathbf{C})$, etc., will be the dual primitive homology groups (the effective cycles of Lefschetz).

Theorem 6.3: Let $X$ be a compact Kähler manifold, let $P^r(X, \mathbf{C}) = \sum_{p+q=r} P^{p,q}(X)$ be the primitive cohomology on $X, r = 0, \ldots, 2n$, and let $Q$ be the quadratic form on $P^r(X, \mathbf{C})$ given by (6.2). Then

(a) $Q(P^{r-q,q}, P^{s,r-s}) = 0(q \neq s)$.
(b) $i^{-r}(-1)^q Q(P^{r-q,q}, \bar{P}^{r-q,q}) > 0$.

Here (a) means $Q(\xi, \eta) = 0$ for $\xi \in P^{r-q,q}$ and $\eta \in P^{s,r-s}$, and (b) means that

$$i^{-r}(-1)^q Q(\xi, \bar{\xi}) > 0, \quad \text{for all nonzero } \xi \in P^{r-q,q}.$$

Proof: First we observe that $Q$ restricted to $P^r(X, \mathbf{C})$ has a simpler form, namely,

(6.5) $Q(\xi, \eta) = (-1)^{r(r+1)/2} \int_X L^{n-r} \xi \wedge \eta, \quad \xi, \eta \in P^r(X, \mathbf{C})$

and as in the proof of Theorem 6.1, we have

Theorem 6.3 is that the corresponding quadratic form in (b) for the full Dolbeault group $H^{p,q}(X)$ contained in the full de Rham group $H^r(X, \mathbf{C})$ is an Hermitian symmetric form which is nondegenerate, but it is no longer positive definite, in general (cf. Hodge [1]). Since the primitive cohomology generates the full cohomology by means of the fundamental class $\omega$, there is no essential loss of information.

Remark: If $X$ is a compact Kähler manifold of even complex dimension $2m$, then one can use the above type of considerations to show that the signature of the underlying topological manifold, which is the same as the signature of the quadratic form

$$A(\xi, \eta) = \int_X \xi \wedge \eta, \quad \xi, \eta \in H^{2m}(X, \mathbf{R}),$$

can be computed in terms of the Hodge numbers $h^{p,q}(X)$. More precisely, one has

$$\sigma(X) = \sum_{p,q} (-1)^p h^{p,q}(X) = \sum_{p=q(2)} (-1)^p h^{p,q}(X),$$

where $\sigma(X)$, the signature of $X$, is the difference between the number of positive and negative eigenvalues of the (symmetric, nondegenerate) quadratic form $A$, and, as is well known in algebraic topology, is a topological invariant of such a real $4m$-dimensional oriented topological manifold (see, e.g., Hirzebruch [1]). For more details see Weil [1], p. 78.

Let $X$ be a compact Kähler manifold and consider the Hodge decomposition of the primitive cohomology group of degree $r$,

$$P^r(X, \mathbf{C}) = \sum_{p+q=r} P^{p,q}(X).$$

Then we have the subspace relation

$$P^{p,q}(X) \subset P^r(X, \mathbf{C}),$$

and we note that Theorem 6.3 imposes restrictions that subspaces be of

theorem) by integration of differential forms over cycles. Thus we have a matrix

$$\Omega = (\omega_{\alpha\rho}) = \begin{bmatrix}
\int_{\gamma_1} \varphi^1 \cdots \int_{\gamma_b} \varphi^1 \\
\cdot & \cdot \\
\cdot & \cdot \\
\cdot & \cdot
\end{bmatrix},$$

which we call the period matrix of the differential forms $\{\varphi^\alpha\}$ with respect to the cycles $\{\gamma_\rho\}$. It is clear that $\Omega$ is an $h \times b$ matrix of maximal rank. We can now express the Hodge-Riemann bilinear relations in terms of this matrix representation for the subspace relation $P^{p,q} \subset H^r$. Namely, we see that

$$Q(\varphi^\alpha, \varphi^\beta) = Q\left( \sum_\sigma \omega_{\alpha\sigma} \hat{\gamma}_\sigma, \sum_\tau \omega_{\beta\tau} \hat{\gamma}_\tau \right)$$

$$= \sum_{\sigma,\tau} \omega_{\alpha\sigma} Q_{\sigma\tau} \omega_{\beta\tau} = 0,$$

and, similarly,

$$i^{-r}(-1)^q Q(\varphi^\alpha, \bar{\varphi}^{\beta}) = i^{-r}(-1)^q \sum_\alpha \omega_{\alpha\sigma} Q_{\sigma\tau} \bar{\omega}_{\beta\tau} > 0,$$

which can be expressed in the form (letting $Q$ denote the matrix $[Q_{\sigma\tau}]$)

(a) $\Omega Q^t \Omega = 0$.

(b) $i^{-r}(-1)^q \Omega Q^t \bar{\Omega} > 0$.

The bilinear relations above were first written down in this form by Riemann for periods of holomorphic 1-forms (abelian differentials) on a Riemann surface (Riemann [1]). If we make a change of basis for $P^{p,q}(X)$, then we get another period matrix $\tilde{\Omega}$ which is related to the original $\Omega$ by the relation $\tilde{\Om

(see Chap. 1). The invariant description of the period mapping given above is due to Griffiths. If the complex structure on $X$ is allowed to vary in some manner (for a fixed cup product operator $L$ on a fixed topological manifold $X_{\text{top}}$), then the subspace $P^{p,q}(X) \subset P^r(X, \mathbf{C})$ will vary, although the primitive de Rham group remains fixed. Thus the variation of the Hodge group $P^{p,q}$ in $P^r$ is a reflection of the variation of the complex structure on the underlying topological manifold $X_{\text{top}}$.† We refer to this generally as a variation of Hodge structure, and Griffiths has introduced a formulation for making this variation of Hodge structure precise and in many instances a true measure of the variation of complex structures (see Griffiths [1], where he introduces the period mapping, and his survey article [3], which contains an up-to-date bibliography of the very active work in this field as well as a long list of conjectures and problems).

We shall introduce here what we shall call a Griffiths domain, which is a classifying space for Hodge structures and which is chosen in such a manner that an a priori holomorphic variation of complex structures induces a holomorphic mapping into the Griffiths domain (a subset of an appropriate Grassmannian-type domain manifold generalizing the classical upper half-plane and Siegel’s upper half-space).

Let $X$ be a Kähler manifold as above and let

$$P^r(X) = \sum_{p+q=r} P^{p,q}(X)$$

be the Hodge decomposition for primitive cohomology. Then we define

$$F^s(X) = P^{r,0}(X) + \cdots + P^{r-s,s}(X), \quad s \leq r,$$

and we see that

$$F^1 \subset F^2 \subset \cdots \subset F^r = P^r$$

and we call $\{F^s\}$ the Hodge filtration of the primitive de Rham group $P^r$.‡ Then let $f^s = \dim_C F^s$, $\sigma = [(r-

associate the integers $f^0, \ldots, f^\sigma$ coming from the Hodge filtration, and there is then a mapping defined,

$$X \rightarrow F^0(X) \subset F^1(X) \subset \cdots \subset F^\sigma(X) \subset P^r(X, \mathbf{C})$$

which we then write as

$$\Phi(X) \in F(f, W).$$

This is Griffiths’ period mapping (Griffiths [1]).

Let $X \xrightarrow{\pi} T$ be a proper surjective holomorphic mapping of maximal rank from a complex manifold $X$ to a complex manifold $T$. Then $X \xrightarrow{\pi} T$ is called a complex-analytic family of compact complex manifolds. Let $X_t = \pi^{-1}(t)$. Then $X_t$ is the fibre over $t$, or the compact complex submanifold of $X$ corresponding to the parameter $t \in T$. A basic fact about such families is the following proposition asserting that they are locally differentiably trivial.

**Proposition 6.4:** If $t_o \in T$, then there exists a neighborhood $U$ of $t_o$ in $T$ and a fibre preserving diffeomorphism

(6.6) $$f: X_{t_0} \times U \rightarrow \pi^{-1}(U).$$

**Proof:** This is a local problem in the parameter space $T$, and so let $T$ be an open set in $\mathbf{C}^k$ and let $t_0 = 0$ be the origin assumed to be in $T$. Then we have coordinates $(t_1, \ldots, t_k)$ for points in $T$, and by the implicit function theorem, if $p \in X_0 = \pi^{-1}(0)$, it follows that we can find a neighborhood $U_p$ and a biholomorphic mapping

$$\psi_p: U_p \rightarrow U_p' \subset \mathbf{C}^n \times \mathbf{C}^k,$$

with

$$\psi_p|_{U_p \cap X_t} \xrightarrow{\cong} U_p' \cap \mathbf

where

$$z_j = x_j + ix_{j+n}, \quad j = 1, \ldots, n$$

$$t_j = s_j + is_{j+k}, \quad j = 1, \ldots, k,$$

and where $(g_{ij})$ is a real positive definite matrix and $z_j = z_j^\alpha$ (dropping the notational dependence on $\alpha$). Consider a curve of the form (in $U^\alpha$)

$$\gamma_{p,t}(\tau) = (z(\tau), \tau t),$$

depending on the parameters $(p, t)$, where $p = (z, 0)$ is a point on $X_0 \cap U_\alpha$. We require that

(a) $\gamma_{p,t}(0) = (z, 0)$.

(b) The curve $\gamma_{p,t}$ be orthogonal to $X_{\tau t}$ with respect to the metric $h$ at $\gamma_{p,t}(\tau)$.

Note that the nature of the parameterization and the coordinate system ensures us that the curve intersects $X_{\tau t}$ precisely at the point $\gamma_{p,t}(\tau)$. Condition (b) can be rewritten as the system of ordinary differential equations

$$\sum_{j=1}^{2n} g_{ij}(x(\tau), \tau s)x_j'(\tau) + \sum_{v=1}^{2k} h_{iv}(x(\tau), \tau s)s_v = 0, \quad i = 1, \ldots, 2n.$$

It follows that this nonlinear system of equations satisfies a Lipschitz condition (it is quasilinear) such that the standard existence, uniqueness, and parameter dependence theorems for ordinary differential equations hold, and thus there is a unique curve associated to each parameter point $(p, t)$, and we define

$$f(p, t) = \gamma_{p,t}(1)$$

and obtain a mapping

$$f: X_0 \times T \longrightarrow X,$$

which is (for $|t|$ small) an injective differentiable mapping. Moreover, the differential of this mapping at points of $X_0$ is readily seen to be invertible, and thus the mapping

$$f

structures on a Riemann surface. The recent book by Morrow and Kodaira [1] gives a good introduction to deformation theory along with many examples, and we refer the reader to this reference as well as the original papers of Kodaira and Spencer [1, 2]. One of Griffiths’ objects in introducing the period mapping above was to obtain a representation for the variation of complex structure (in the sense of deformation theory) in terms of the variation of Hodge structure. To describe this mapping, we need some auxiliary results from deformation theory, which we shall now describe.

**Proposition 6.5:** Let $X \xrightarrow{\pi} T$ be a complex-analytic family and let $h_t^{p,q} = h_t^{p,q}(X_t)$. Then $h_t^{p,q}$ is an upper semicontinuous function of the parameter $t$; moreover, $h_t^{p,q} \leq h_t^{p,q}_0, t_0 \in T$ and $t$ near $t_0$.

**Proof:** This is a local result. Let $T \subset \mathbf{C}^k$ and $t_0 = 0 \in \mathbf{C}^k$. We first use (6.6) to get a diffeomorphism

$$f_t: X_t \longrightarrow X_0,$$

which induces a differentiable vector bundle isomorphism,

$$f_t^*: \wedge^r T^*(X_0) \longrightarrow \wedge^r T^*(X_t).$$

The almost complex structure $J_t$ acting on $T(X_t)$ induces an almost complex structure $\tilde{J}_t$ on $T(X_0)$, via $f_t$, and hence a projection

$$\Pi_{p,q,t}: \wedge^* T^*(X_0) \longrightarrow \wedge^p q T^*(X_0),$$

which is maximal rank for $t = 0$ and thus for $t$ near 0. Therefore the diagram

$$\wedge^r T^*(X_0) \longrightarrow \wedge^p q T^*(X_0) \cong \wedge^p q

If for some $p, q, h_t^{p,q} < h_{t_0}^{p,q}$, for $|t - t_0| < \delta$, then we would have a contradiction.

Q.E.D.

If now $X \xrightarrow{\pi} T$ is a complex-analytic family of Kähler manifolds (e.g., a family of projective algebraic submanifolds, parameterized by varying the coefficients of the defining homogeneous equations) and $T$ is connected, then for all fibres $X_t$ in the family we have the same Hodge numbers $h^{p,q}$ and hence the same primitive Hodge numbers $h_0^{p,q}$, and finally the same Hodge filtration numbers $f^s, 0 \leq s \leq \sigma = [r/2]$. Thus for this family we may define the flag manifold

$$F(f^0, \ldots, f^\sigma, W), \quad W = P^r(X_{t_0}, \mathbf{C})$$

and we see that the mapping

(6.7) $$\Phi: T \longrightarrow F(f, W)$$

given by

$$\Phi(t) = \Phi(X_t) = [F^0(X_t) \subset \ldots \subset F^\sigma(X_t) \subset W]$$

is well defined.

Theorem 6.7 (Griffiths): The period mapping (6.7) is a holomorphic mapping.

Remark: The proof of this theorem depends principally on the Kodaira-Spencer deformation theory formalism (Kodaira and Spencer [1]), which we do not develop here (see e.g., Morrow and Kodaira [1]). In fact, Griffiths shows many more properties of the period mapping such as the nature of the curvature of certain natural metrics restricted to $\Phi(T)$, or that $\Phi(T)$ is a locally closed analytic subvariety of $F(f, W)$, etc. (see Griffiths [2, 6]). He also gives conditions (verifiable in many examples) such that if $\Phi(t_1) \neq \Phi(t_2)$, then the two complex manifolds $X

One proves that $X$ is a compact projective algebraic manifold and that $D$ is an open subset of $X$. Both are homogeneous spaces, with natural invariant metrics. We call such a domain $D$ a Griffiths domain.† Because of Theorem 6.3, it follows that

$$\Phi(T) \subset D \subset X \subset F(f, W).$$

Moreover, there is a natural fibering of $D$ (because of the homogeneous structure) as a real-analytic family of compact complex submanifolds of $D$, as in Example 6.8 below (possibly zero-dimensional, as in the classical case), and Griffiths obtains an infinitesimal period relation which asserts that the mapping $\Phi$ is transversal to the fibres in the real-analytic fibering mentioned above.

We mention two examples of Griffiths domains.

**Example 6.8:** Let $r = 1$. Then $\sigma = 0$, $F^0 = H^{1,0}(X)$, and the flag manifold $F(f, W)$ becomes

$$F(f, W) = G_{h,2h}(\mathbf{C}),$$

and letting $Q$ be in standard form (6.3),

$$Q = \begin{bmatrix} 0 & I_h \\ -I_h & 0 \end{bmatrix},$$

we see that $X$ and $D$ are defined in terms of the “homogeneous coordinates” for $G_{h,2h}(\mathbf{C})$,

$$X = \{\Omega \in M_{h,2h}(\mathbf{C}): \Omega Q^t \Omega = 0\}$$

$$D = \{\Omega \in M_{h,2h}(\mathbf{C}): \Omega Q^t \Omega = 0, -i\Omega Q^t \bar{\Omega} > 0\}.$$

This Griffiths domain $D$ is biholomorphically equivalent to Siegel’s upper half-space (see Griffiths [1]),

$$D_s = \{Z \in \mathfrak{M}_{h,h}(\mathbf{C}): Z =^t Z, \text{Im }

and
$i^2 Q|_{H^2,0+H^0,2}$ is positive definite

and
$i^2 Q|_{P^{1,1}}$ is negative definite.

Therefore we have that
$$i^2 Q = \begin{bmatrix} I_{2h} & 0 \\ 0 & -I_k \end{bmatrix},$$

where $k = \dim P^2 - 2h$. $D$ then has the homogeneous representation
$$D = SO(2h, k) / (U(h) \times SO(k)),$$

and we note that the maximal compact subgroup of the noncompact real group $SO(2h, k)$ is $SO(2h) \times SO(k)$. Thus we have a natural fibering
$$D = SO(2h, k) / (U(h) \times SO(h))$$
$$M = SO(2h, k) / (SO(2h) \times SO(k)),$$

and it so happens that the fibres of this mapping are compact complex submanifolds of positive dimension when $h \neq 1$.

The reader is referred to Griffiths’ papers in the References for a further discussion of the period mapping and its relation to the study of the variation of complex structure on a given (usually projective algebraic) manifold.

The discussion and analytic behavior of the period mapping into a Griffiths domain is contained in Griffiths [1, 3 and 6], while the geometry of a Griffiths domain itself is discussed in Griffiths and Schmid [1], Schmid [1], and Wells [1, 2], Wells–Wolf [1]. The relation of the periods of harmonic forms on an algebraic hypersurface $V$ of $\mathbf{P}_n$ and the rational forms on $\mathbf{P}_n - V$ with poles of various orders along $V$ is studied in Griffiths [5] along with some interesting applications to algebraic geometry.<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>