

CHAPTER VI

KODAIRA’S

PROJECTIVE EMBEDDING THEOREM

In this chapter we are going to prove a famous theorem due to Kodaira, which gives a characterization of which compact complex manifolds admit an embedding into complex projective space. In Sec. 1 we shall define Hodge manifolds as those which carry an integral (1, 1) form which is positive definite in local coordinates. We then give various examples of such manifolds. Kodaira’s theorem asserts that a compact complex manifold is projective algebraic if and only if it is a Hodge manifold. This is a very useful theorem, as we shall see, since it is often easy to verify the criterion. Chow’s theorem asserts that projective algebraic manifolds are indeed algebraic, i.e., defined by the zeros of homogeneous polynomials. Thus the combination of these two theorems allows one to reduce problems of analysis to ones of algebra (cf. Serre’s famous paper [2] in which this program of comparison is carried out in great detail).

In Sec. 2 we shall use the Hodge theory developed in the previous two chapters to prove Kodaira’s vanishing theorem, which plays a role in compact complex manifold theory similar to that of Theorem B of Cartan in Stein manifold theory (see Gunning and Rossi [1]).

In Sec. 3 we shall introduce the concept of a quadratic transform of a complex manifold at a given point (the Hopf blowup) and study the behavior of metrics on holomorphic line bundles under pullbacks with respect to a quadratic transform. In Sec. 4. we shall bring together the tools of Secs. 2 and 3 (which depended in turn on the work in the previous chapters) to prove Kodaira’s embedding theorem.

1. Hodge Manifolds

In this section we want to consider a restricted class of Kähler manifolds defined by a certain topological (integrality) condition. If $X$ is a compact complex manifold, then a $d$-closed differential form $\varphi$ on $X$ is said to be integral if its cohomology class in the de Rham group, $[\varphi] \in H^*(X, \mathbf{C})$, is in the image

Let $h$ be a Kähler metric on a complex manifold of Kähler type and let $\Omega$ be the associated fundamental form.

Definition 1.1: If $\Omega$ is an integral differential form, then $\Omega$ is called a Hodge form on $X$, and $h$ is called a Hodge metric. A manifold of Kähler type is called a Hodge manifold if it admits a Hodge metric.

This terminology was first used by A. Weil. The main theorem of this chapter (due to Kodaira [2]) is that a compact complex manifold is Hodge if and only if it is projective algebraic. First we shall see that there are many examples of Hodge manifolds, some of which are not at all obviously projective algebraic, and in passing we shall note that the Hodge condition is often easy to verify in practice.

Let $E$ be a holomorphic line bundle over a complex manifold $X$. Then we let

$$E^\mu = \underbrace{E \otimes \cdots \otimes E}_{\mu \text{ factors}}$$

and

$$E^{-\mu} = (E^*)^\mu,$$

for any positive integer $\mu$. We let $E^0 = X \times \mathbf{C}$, the trivial line bundle over $X$, which is isomorphic to $E^\mu \otimes E^{-\mu}$ for all positive $\mu$, as is easy to see. If $\{g_{\alpha\beta}\}$ is a set of transition functions for $E$ with respect to some locally finite set of trivializations, then $\{g_{\alpha\beta}^\mu\}$ is a set of transition functions for $E^\mu$ for all integers $\mu$. This is a simple fact, whose verification we leave to the reader (cf. Sec. 2 in Chap. I). In various examples below we shall use this principle to compare different line bundles on the same space, by comparing appropriate transition functions on the same open covering. If $X$ is of complex dimension $n$, then we let

$$K_X = \wedge^n T^*(X)$$

be the canonical line bundle of $X$. It follows that

$$\mathcal{O}_X(K_X) = \mathcal{O}_X(\

Example 1.3: Let $X$ be a compact complex manifold which is an unramified covering of a Hodge manifold $Y$; i.e., there is a holomorphic mapping $X \xrightarrow{\pi} Y$ such that $\pi^{-1}(p)$ is discrete and $\pi$ is a local biholomorphism at each point $x \in X$. Then $X$ is a Hodge manifold. To see this, simply let $\Omega$ be a Hodge form on $Y$ and then $\pi^*\Omega$ will be a Hodge form on $X$. Similarly, if $X \xrightarrow{f} Y$ is an immersion, then $f^*\Omega$ will give a Hodge manifold structure to $X$.

Example 1.4: Let $X$ be a compact connected Riemann surface. Then $X$ is a Hodge manifold. Namely, since $\dim_R X = 2$, we have by Poincaré duality that $C \cong H^0(X, C) \cong H^2(X, C)$, and, moreover, $H^2(X, C) = H^{1,1}(X)$. Let $\tilde{\Omega}$ be the fundamental form on $X$ associated with a Hermitian metric. Then $\tilde{\Omega}$ is a closed form [of type (1, 1)] which is a basis element for the one-dimensional de Rham group $H^2(X, C)$. Let $c = \int_X \tilde{\Omega}$, and then $\Omega = c^{-1}\tilde{\Omega}$ will be an integral positive form on $X$ of type (1, 1). Hence $X$ is Hodge. This example generalizes to the assertion that any Kähler manifold $X$ with the property that $\dim_C H^{1,1}(X) = 1$ is necessarily Hodge. This follows from the fact that multiplication by an appropriate constant will make the Kähler form on $X$ integral, as above in the Riemann surface case (one has to also make an appropriate choice of basis for the integral 2-cycles).

Example 1.5: Let $D$ be a bounded domain in $C^n$ and let $\

shall also need the property that

$$k_D(\gamma(z)) = k_D(z) \left| \det \frac{\partial \gamma(z)}{\partial z} \right|^{-2}, \quad \gamma \in \text{Aut}(D),$$

where $\partial \gamma / \partial z$ is the Jacobian matrix of the biholomorphism $\gamma$ (see Bergman [1] or Weil [1]). Suppose that $\{U_\alpha\}$ is a covering of $X$ by a finite number of coordinate patches, with $\psi_\alpha: U_\alpha \rightarrow D$ being the coordinate functions (which can be taken as local inverses for the projection $\pi: D \rightarrow X = D / \Gamma$). Then the transition function $\gamma_{\alpha\beta} = \psi_\alpha^\circ \psi_\beta^{-1} \in \Gamma$ and is defined on all of $D$. It then follows that $\{(\partial \gamma_{\alpha\beta} / \partial z)(\psi_\beta(p))\}$ are the transition functions for $T(X)$ and that $g_{\alpha\beta}(z) = \det(\partial \gamma_{\alpha\beta} / \partial z)(\psi_\beta(p))$ are the transition functions for $\wedge^n T(X)$. Thus the functions $\{g_{\alpha\beta}^{-1}\}$ are the transition functions for the canonical line bundle $K_X = \wedge^n T^*(X)$. Let $k^\alpha = k_D^\circ \psi_\alpha$ be positive functions defined on $U_\alpha \subset X$. Then it is easy to check from (1.2) that

$$k^\alpha(p) = \left| \det \frac{\partial \gamma_{\alpha\beta}(z)}{\partial z} \right|^2 k^\beta(p),$$

where $z = \psi_\beta(p)$. This shows that the $\{k^\alpha\}$ transform like a metric for $K$ and thus define a metric on $K_X$. By the results in Chap. III, we see that

$$c_1(K_X) = \frac{i}{2\pi} \bar{\partial} k_\alpha^{-1} \partial k_\alpha = \frac{-i}{2\pi} \partial

skew-symmetric matrix $Q$ of rank $2n$ such that

(I) $\Omega A^t \Omega = 0$

(II) $-i\Omega A^t \bar{\Omega} = M > 0$ (positive definite),

where $A = Q^{-1}$. Then we say that $\Omega$ is a Riemann matrix (cf. Conforto [1] and Siegel [1]). Consider the matrix $P = \begin{bmatrix} \Omega \\ \bar{\Omega} \end{bmatrix}$, called the big period matrix. Then it follows from the conditions above that $P$ is nonsingular. Namely, consider the product [using the relations (1.3) above] and, noting that $^t M = \bar{M}$,

(1.4) $PA^t \bar{P} = \begin{bmatrix} \Omega \\ \bar{\Omega} \end{bmatrix} A[^t \bar{\Omega}, ^t \Omega] = \begin{bmatrix} iM & 0 \\ 0 & -i\bar{M} \end{bmatrix},$

which is nonsingular, since $M > 0$, and hence $P$ is nonsingular. Thus we find that, by taking the inverse of (1.4),

$$Q = \frac{i}{2}[^t \Omega H \bar{\Omega} - ^t \bar{\Omega} H \Omega],$$

where we let $^t H = 2M^{-1}$, which is also positive definite, and thus we find that

(1.5) $Q_{\alpha\beta} = \frac{i}{2} \sum_{\mu,\nu} h_{\mu\nu} \left( \omega_{\mu\alpha} \bar{\omega}_{v\beta} - \omega_{\mu\beta} \bar{\omega}_{v\alpha} \right).$

Conversely, if the periods $\{\omega_\alpha\}$ satisfy (1.5) for some Hermitian positive definite matrix $H$, where $Q$ is a skew-symmetric nondegenerate matrix with integer coefficients, then $\Omega$ is a Riemann matrix. Let

$$

where the functions $h_{\mu\nu}$ are not necessarily constant, as we had above. However,

$$\int_{C_{\alpha\beta}} \omega \in \mathbf{Z},$$

and we can replace $h_{\alpha\beta}$ in (1.5) by the mean value

$$\hat{h}_{\alpha\beta} = \mu(X)^{-1} \int_X h_{\alpha\beta} d\mu,$$

where $\mu$ is the invariant measure on the torus induced by Lebesgue measure in $\mathbf{C}^n$. One can then verify that the resulting form $\hat{\omega}$ will satisfy the condition (1.5) and will have a positive definite coefficient matrix. Thus the existence of a Hodge form on $X$ implies that the period matrix is a Riemann matrix.

An example of a complex torus not satisfying Riemann’s condition is given by the period matrix $(n = 2)$

$$\Omega = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 & \sqrt{-2} & \sqrt{-5} \\ 0 & 1 & \sqrt{-3} & \sqrt{-7} \end{bmatrix}.$$

Namely, suppose that there existed a matrix $A$ with rational coefficients such that

$$\Omega A^t \Omega = 0.$$

Then the element in the first row and second column of (1.8) is given by

$$a_{12} + a_{13} \sqrt{-3} + a_{14} \sqrt{-7} - a_{23} \sqrt{-2} - a_{24} \sqrt{-5} + a_{34} (\sqrt{14} - \sqrt{15}) = 0,$$

from which it follows easily that

$$a_{12} = a_{13} = a_{14} = a_{23} = a_{24} = a_{34} = 0,$$

since $A$ was assumed to have rational entries. Since $A$ is skew-symmetric, it follows that $A$ cannot be nonsingular, which contradicts the assumption of $\Omega$ being a Riemann matrix. Thus this particular complex torus cannot be projective algebraic. One can show, in

We shall now formulate the vanishing theorems for line bundles. A differential form $\varphi$ of type (1, 1) on a complex manifold is said to be positive if, in local coordinates at any point $p$,

$$\varphi = i \sum_{\mu, \nu} \varphi_{\mu \nu}(z) dz_{\mu} \wedge d\bar{z}_{\nu},$$

and the matrix $[\varphi_{\mu \nu}(z)]$ is a positive definite Hermitian symmetric matrix for each fixed point $z$ near $p$. Notationally, we denote this condition by $\varphi > 0$.

**Definition 2.1:** Let $E \rightarrow X$ be a holomorphic line bundle and let $c_1(E)$ be the first Chern class of $E$ considered as an element of the de Rham group $H^2(X, \mathbf{R})$. Then $E$ is said to be positive if there is a real closed differential form $\psi$ of type (1, 1) such that $\psi \in c_1(E)$ and $\psi$ is a positive differential form. $E$ is said to be negative if $E^*$ is positive.

For computational ease we prove the following proposition.

**Proposition 2.2:** Let $E \rightarrow X$ be a holomorphic line bundle over a compact complex manifold $X$. Then $E$ is positive if and only if there is a Hermitian metric $h$ on $E$ such that $i\Theta_E$ is a positive differential form, where $\Theta_E$ is the curvature of $E$ with respect to the canonical connection induced by $h$.

**Proof:** It is obvious from the differential-geometric definition of $c_1(E)$ that $i\Theta_E$ positive for some metric $h$ will imply that $E$ is positive. Conversely, suppose that $E$ is positive and that $\varphi \in c_1(E)$, where $\varphi$ is a positive differential form. Let $h$ be any metric on $E$, and then with respect to a local frame $f$ we have $[h = h(f)]$

$$\varphi_0 = \frac{i}{2\pi} \bar{\partial}

$\bar{\partial}\varphi = \bar{\partial}\varphi_0 = 0$, and $\partial\varphi = \partial\varphi_0 = 0$, since $\varphi$ can locally be written in the form $\varphi = \partial\bar{\partial}u$, for some $C^\infty$ function $u$ (Lemma II.2.15), and $\varphi_0$ is already of this form. Thus

$$d\eta = 2\bar{\partial}\bar{\partial}^* Gd\eta,$$

and we can use the Kähler identity

$$i\bar{\partial}^* = L^*\partial - \partial L^*$$

(Corollary V.4.10), obtaining

$$d\eta = 2i\bar{\partial}\partial L^* Gd\eta,$$

since $\partial G = G\partial$ and $\partial d\eta = 0$. Therefore we set $r = 2L^*Gd\eta$, and by letting $h' = h \cdot e^{2\pi r}$ be a new metric for $E$, we obtain

$$\frac{i}{2\pi} \bar{\partial}\partial \log h' = \frac{i}{2\pi} \bar{\partial}\partial \log h + i\bar{\partial}\partial r$$

$$= \varphi_0 + d\eta$$

$$= \varphi.$$

Q.E.D.

**Example 2.3:** Let $X = \mathbf{P}_n$, and consider the following three basic line bundles over $\mathbf{P}_n$:

(a) The hyperplane section bundle: $H \longrightarrow \mathbf{P}_n$.

(b) The universal bundle: $U \longrightarrow \mathbf{P}_n(U = U_{1,n+1})$.

(c) The canonical bundle: $K = \wedge^n T^*(\mathbf{P}_n) \longrightarrow \mathbf{P}_n$.

Here $H$ is the line bundle associated to the divisor of a hyperplane in $\mathbf{P}_n$, e.g., $[t_0 = 0]$, in the homogeneous coordinates $[t_0, \ldots, t_n]$. Then the divisor is defined by $\

we have
$$\zeta_j^\beta = \zeta_j^\alpha \cdot (\zeta_\beta^\alpha)^{-1}$$

in $U_\alpha \cap U_\beta$ which is the (nonlinear) change of coordinates for $P_n$ from $U_\alpha$ to $U_\beta$. Thus we obtain easily, by substituting into the above form $\Phi_\alpha$,

$$\Phi_\alpha = (\zeta_\beta^\alpha)^{n+1} (-1)^\beta d\zeta_0^\beta \wedge \cdots \wedge d\zeta_{\beta-1}^{\beta} \wedge d\zeta_{\beta+1}^{\beta} \wedge \cdots \wedge d\zeta_n^\beta$$

$$= (\zeta_\beta^\alpha)^{n+1} \Phi_\beta$$

Now we see that these transition functions for the frames $\{\Phi_\alpha\}$ induce transition functions $\{k_{\alpha\beta}\}$ for the canonical bundle $K$ which are given by

$$k_{\alpha\beta} ([t_0, \ldots, t_n]) = \left( \frac{t_\alpha}{t_\beta} \right)^{n+1}.$$

We note that the choice of the minus sign in the trivializing sections was necessary for the transition functions for $K$ to be comparable to the transition functions for $U$ and $H$. Thus $K = \wedge^n T^*(\mathbf{P}_n) = U^{n+1} = (H^*)^{n+1}$. Moreover, the universal bundle $U \rightarrow \mathbf{P}_n$ has the curvature form given in (III.2.10), which is the negative of the positive differential form

$$\Omega = \frac{i}{2} \frac{|t|^2 \sum_{\mu=0}^{n} dt_\mu \wedge d\bar{t}_\mu - \sum_{\mu,v=0}^{n} \bar{t}_\mu t_v dt_\mu \wedge d\bar{t}_v}{|t|^4},$$

expressed in homogeneous coordinates. Namely, $\Omega$ is the canonical Kähler form on

Let $P_1 \subset P_n$ be a generator for $H^2(P_n, Z)$, and then we see that if we consider powers of the hyperplane section bundle $H^m$, we obtain

$$c_1(H^m)(P_1) = m.$$

Namely, by the properties of Chern classes,†

$$c_1(H) = c_1(U^*) = -c_1(U) \quad \text{and} \quad c_1(U)(P_1) = -1.$$

Since $c_1$ is an isomorphism of abelian groups, it follows that every holomorphic line bundle $L \longrightarrow P_n$ (in particular $U$ and $K$ in the above example) is a power of the hyperplane section bundle, $L = H^m$, and $c_1(L)(P_1) = m$. We use here the fact that $c_1(L) = c_1(H^m) = c_1(H \otimes \cdots \otimes H) = c_1(H) + \cdots + c_1(H)$ (cf. the proof of Theorem III.3.6). In particular, we obtain from Example 2.3 that $c_1(K_P_n)(P_n) = -(n+1)$. Thus the holomorphic line bundles on $P_n$ are completely classified in this manner by their Chern classes.

We now state the basic vanishing theorem due originally to Kodaira [1].

**Theorem 2.4:** Suppose that $X$ is a compact complex manifold.

(a) Let $E \longrightarrow X$ be a holomorphic line bundle with the property that $E \otimes K^*$ is a positive line bundle. Then

$$H^q(X, \mathcal{O}(E)) = 0, \quad q > 0.$$

(b) Let $E \longrightarrow X$ be a negative line bundle. Then

$$H^q(X, \Omega^p(E)) = 0, \quad p + q < n.$$

**Remark:** Kodaira’s theorems were first proved in Kodaira [1] ((a) and $p = 0$ in

where $\xi^j(f) \in \mathcal{E}^p(U)$. Moreover, if $g$ is a holomorphic change of frame, then we have the compatibility condition that

$$g^{-1}\xi(f) = \xi(gf)$$

(see Sec. 2 of Chap. III), where the matrix $g^{-1}$ of functions is multiplied with the vector $\xi(f)$ of differential forms. We now let $*$ be the Hodge operator defined with respect to the Kähler metric on $X$, and $*$ acts naturally on vector-valued forms by setting

$$*\xi(f) = \begin{bmatrix} *\xi^1(f) \\ \cdot \\ \cdot \\ *\xi^\rho(f) \end{bmatrix}$$

and noting that, since $*$ is C-linear,

$$*\xi(gf) = *g^{-1}\xi(gf) = g^{-1}*\xi(f),$$

and hence $*\xi(f)$ satisfies the compatibility conditions and defines a global element in $\mathcal{E}^p(X, E)$. This is true of any zeroth order differential operator (which is a homomorphism of the underlying vector bundles). Thus

$$L: \mathcal{E}^p(X, E) \longrightarrow \mathcal{E}^{p+2}(X, E)$$

is well defined by letting

$$L(\xi(f)) = (L\xi^j(f)), \quad j = 1, \ldots, \rho,$$

and hence $L^* = w*L^*$ is also defined. Of course, exterior differentiation $d$ does not extend to vector-valued forms, and we have to introduce a connection on $E$ in order to define covariant differentiation on $E$, a generalization of exterior differentiation. Namely, as in Chap. III, we let

$$D = d + \theta,$$

where $\theta$ is the connection defined by

$$\theta = h^{-1}\partial h \quad (\text{with respect to a local holomorphic frame})$$

if $h$ is the metric. Moreover,

$$D = D' + D'',$$

where

$$D' = \partial + \theta$$

$$D'' = \bar{\partial}$$

are the spl

Note that in making this computation the Hodge inner product can be represented with respect to a local holomorphic frame

$$(\xi, \eta) = (-1)^p \int \bar{\eta}^t \eta \cdot h \cdot \xi, \quad \xi, \eta \in \mathcal{E}^p(X, E),$$

where $\xi = \xi(f), \eta = \eta(f)$, and $h = h(f)$ are vectors and matrices, respectively, and the multiplication inside the integral is matrix multiplication. Also it suffices to compute the adjoint (which we know is a differential operator by Proposition IV.2.8), to assume that $\xi$ and $\eta$ have support where the holomorphic frame is defined. The crucial factor for our later use is that the adjoint $(D')^*_E$ does not depend on the Hermitian metric of the fibres of $E$, and, in particular, is the more classical scalar adjoint $\partial^*$ acting in $\mathcal{E}^*(X)$. The adjoint of $\bar{\partial}$ (a scalar operator) is no longer scalar, however, Then we can conclude that, by Corollary V.4.10, since the scalar operator adjoints are with respect to a scalar metric,

(2.3) $$\bar{\partial} L^* - L^* \bar{\partial} = i \partial^* = i (D')^*_E.$$

Under these circumstances we have the following inequality due to Nakano [1].

**Proposition 2.5:** Let $\xi \in \mathcal{H}^{p,q}(E)$. Then

(a) $(i/2)(\Theta \wedge L^* \xi, \xi) \leq 0.$
(b) $(i/2)(L^* \Theta \wedge \xi, \xi) \geq 0.$

In both (a) and (b) $\Theta (= \bar{\partial} h^{-1} \partial h)$ is the curvature form for the metric $h$ on the holomorphic vector bundle $E$.

**Proof:** We recall that (Proposition III.1.9), as an operator,

$$D^2 = (d + \theta)^2 = \Theta,$$

and

Proof of Theorem 2.4: Suppose that $E$ is a negative line bundle. Then a fundamental form for a Kähler metric on $X$ is given by $\Omega = -(i/2)\Theta$ [noting that $\Theta$ is a closed form of type (1, 1), whose coefficient matrix is negative definite]. Then subtract part (b) from part (a) in Proposition 2.5, and we obtain [noting that $-(i/2)\Theta \wedge$ gets replaced by $L$]

$$([L^*L - LL^*]\xi, \xi) \leq 0.$$

Recalling from Proposition V.1.1(c) that

$$(L^*L - LL^*)\xi = (n - p - q)\xi,$$

we have immediately

$$(n - p - q)(\xi, \xi) \leq 0$$

if $\xi \in \mathcal{H}^{p,q}(E)$, and thus part (b) of Theorem 2.4 follows, by using the results in Example IV.5.7. Part (a) follows from part (b) by Serre duality (Theorem V.2.7). Namely, if $E \otimes K^*$ is positive, then $(E \otimes K^*)^* = K \otimes E^*$ is negative. We then have

$$H^q(X, \mathcal{O}(E)) = H^q(X, \mathcal{O}(K \otimes K^* \otimes E)) = H^q(X, \Omega^n(K^* \otimes E))$$

which is dual to $H^{n-q}(X, \mathcal{O}(K \otimes E^*))$, which vanishes for $q > 0$, by part (b).

Q.E.D.

3. Quadratic Transformations

In this section we are going to study the behavior of positive line bundles under quadratic transformations. Let $X$ be a complex manifold and suppose that $p \in X$. Then we want to define the quadratic transform of the manifold $X$ at the point $p$. Let $U$ be a coordinate neighborhood of the point $p$, with coordinates $

We recall from Sec. 4 in Chap. III that a divisor $D$ in a complex manifold $X$ determines an associated holomorphic line bundle $L(D) \to X$, which is unique up to holomorphic equivalence of line bundles. Let $\tilde{X} \xrightarrow{\pi} X$ be the quadratic transform of $X$ at the point $p$ and let $S = \pi^{-1}(p)$. Then $S \cong \mathbf{P}_{n-1}$ and is an $(n-1)$-dimensional compact hypersurface embedded in $\tilde{X}$. As such it is a divisor in $\tilde{X}$ and determines a line bundle $L(S) \to \tilde{X}$, which we shall simply denote by $L$. Moreover, since $S \cong \mathbf{P}_{n-1}$, there is a canonical line bundle, the hyperplane section bundle $H \to S$ (cf. Example 2.3), which is the line bundle determined by the divisor corresponding to a fixed linear hyperplane (e.g., $[t_1 = 0] \subset \mathbf{P}_{n-1}$), all such line bundles being isomorphic. Let $\sigma$ denote the projection $\sigma: W \to \mathbf{P}_{n-1}, \sigma(z, t) = t$, and let $L|_W$ denote the restriction of the line bundle $L \to \tilde{X}$ to $W \subset \tilde{X}$. Then we have the following proposition.

**Proposition 3.1:** $L|_W = \sigma^* H^*$.

**Proof:** Let $U$ be a coordinate neighborhood of $p$ in $X$, and represent $\tilde{X}$ near $\pi^{-1}(U)$ by $W \subset U \times \mathbf{P}_{n-1}$, with coordinates $(z_1, \ldots, z_n) \in U, [t_1, \ldots, t_n] \in \mathbf{P}_{n-1}$. Then $S$ is defined by $z_1 = \cdots = z_n = 0$ in the product space $U \times \mathbf{P}_{n-1}$. Now the hyper

is a holomorphic frame for $K_{\tilde{X}}$ over this open set, letting $\tilde{X} = Q_p X$. Moreover, one obtains easily that

$$f_1 = z_1^{1-n} dz_1 \wedge \cdots \wedge dz_n,$$

using the defining equations for $W$. More generally, we have that

$$f_\alpha = z_\alpha^{1-n} dz_1 \wedge \cdots \wedge dz_n$$

is a frame for $K_{\tilde{X}}$ over $U \times V_\alpha \cap W$, and hence transition functions for the line bundle $K_{\tilde{X}}|_W$ are given by

(3.3) $$f_\beta = g_{\alpha\beta} f_\alpha,$$

since the local frames $\{f_\alpha\}$ define a system of trivializations, which then gives (3.3). It then follows that $g_{\alpha\beta} = (z_\alpha/z_\beta)^{n-1}$, which implies that

$$K_{\tilde{X}}|_W = L^{n-1}|_W \cong L^{n-1} \otimes \pi_p^* K_X|_W$$

since $K_X$ is trivial on $U$. Also, $L|_{\tilde{X}-W}$ is trivial, and $\pi_p$ is biholomorphic on $\tilde{X}-W$. Hence

$$K_{\tilde{X}}|_{\tilde{X}-W} \cong K_{\tilde{X}} \otimes L^{n-1}|_{\tilde{X}-W}.$$

Thus

(3.4) $$K_{\tilde{X}} \cong L^{n-1} \otimes \pi_p^* K_X.$$

Q.E.D.

Let $p \in X$ and let $L_p \rightarrow Q_p X$ be the line bundle corresponding to the divisor $\pi_p^{-1}(p) \subset X$. If $q \neq p$ is another point on $X$, then it is clear that $Q_q Q_p X \cong Q_p Q_q X$, since blowing up at the points $p$ and $q$ are local and independent operations. Let $\pi_{p,

This is easy to see, since if $\rho_{\alpha} = |g_{\beta\alpha}|^2 \rho_{\beta}$ and $r_{\alpha} = |h_{\beta\alpha}|^2 r_{\beta}$ are local transition functions for metrics $\{\rho_{\alpha}\}$ and $\{r_{\alpha}\}$ for $F$ and $G$, respectively (cf. Chap. III), then

$$\Theta_F = \bar{\partial} \partial \log \rho_{\alpha},$$

$$\Theta_G = \bar{\partial} \partial \log r_{\alpha},$$

but $\{g_{\alpha\beta} \cdot h_{\alpha\beta}\}$ are the transition functions for $F \otimes G$, and thus $\{\rho_{\alpha} \cdot r_{\alpha}\}$ defines a metric for $F \otimes G$, since

$$\rho_{\alpha} r_{\alpha} = |g_{\beta\alpha}|^2 |h_{\beta\alpha}|^2 \rho_{\beta} r_{\beta}.$$

Thus

$$\Theta_{F \otimes G} = \bar{\partial} \partial \log (\rho_{\alpha} r_{\alpha})$$

$$= \Theta_F + \Theta_G.$$

We have, then, using the given metric on $E$ and letting $\pi = \pi_p$,

$$\Theta_{\pi^* E^\mu} = \pi^* \Theta_{E^\mu} = \mu \pi^* \Theta_E.$$

We now need to construct appropriate metrics on $L_p$ and $K_{\tilde{X}}$.

First we consider $L_p$. Suppose that $U$ is a coordinate neighborhood near $p$, with coordinates $(z_1, \ldots, z_n)$, that $P_{n-1}$ has homogeneous coordinates $[t_1, \ldots, t_n]$ as before, and that $W \subset U \times P_{n-1}$ is the local representation for $\tilde{X}$ near $\pi_p^{-1}(p)$ as given by (3.1). Let $U'$ be an open subset of $U$ such that $0 \in U' \subset \subset U$, and let $\rho \in \mathcal{D}(U)$ be chosen

Therefore it follows that

$$\Theta_{\pi^*E^\mu \otimes L^* \otimes K_X^*} = \mu \Theta_{\pi^*E} + n \Theta_{L^*} + \Theta_{\pi^*K_X^*}$$

Consider the sum

$$\mu \Theta_{\pi^*E} + \Theta_{\sigma^*H}$$

as differential forms in $U' \times \mathbf{P}_{n-1}$, with the coordinates $(z, t)$ as before. Then $\Theta_{\pi^*E}$ depends only on the $z$-variable and $\Theta_{\sigma^*H}$ depends only on the $t$-variable, and the coefficient matrix of each is positive definite in each of the respective directions, so their sum is a positive differential form† in $U' \times \mathbf{P}_{n-1}$, and the restriction to $W$ is likewise positive. Moreover, $\Theta_{\pi^*E}$ is positive on $U - U'$, so there exists a $\mu_1(p)$ such that $\mu > \mu_1(p)$ implies that

(3.5) $$[\mu \Theta_{\pi^*E}] + \Theta_{L^*} > 0$$

on all of $\tilde{X}$.

Let $\mu_2$ be chosen such that

$$\mu_2 \Theta_E + \Theta_{K_X^*} > 0,$$

which is possible since $E$ is positive and since $X$ is compact. Thus we see that there is a $\mu_0(p)$ such that

(3.6) $$\mu \Theta_{\pi^*E} + n \Theta_{L^*} + \Theta_{\pi_p^*K_X^*} > 0$$

if $\mu > \mu_0(p)$. Namely, let $\mu_0(p) = \mu_2 + n\mu_1(p)$ and note that

$$\mu_2 \Theta_{\pi^*E} + \Theta_{\pi^*K_X^*}$$

is positive everywhere on $\tilde{X}$ except at points of $S$, where it is positive semidefinite (in the obvious sense).

Suppose that $q \in U'$. Then we

and compactness arguments go through in exactly the same manner, and we leave further details to the reader.

Q.E.D.

4. Kodaira’s Embedding Theorem

After the preliminary preparations of the previous sections we are now prepared to prove Kodaira’s embedding theorem for Hodge manifolds. This theorem was conjectured by Hodge [2] and proved by Kodaira [2].

Theorem 4.1: Let $X$ be a compact Hodge manifold. Then $X$ is a projective algebraic manifold.

Remark: (a) As a consequence of the Kodaira embedding theorem, each of the examples of Hodge manifolds in Sec. 1 admits a projective algebraic embedding. In particular, any compact Riemann surface is projective algebraic (a well-known classical result), and a complex torus admits a projective embedding if and only if the periods defining the torus give rise to a Riemann matrix. Such tori are called abelian varieties and can also be characterized by the fact that a complex torus $X$ is an abelian variety if and only if there are $n$ algebraically independent nonconstant meromorphic functions on $X$, where $n = \dim_{\mathbb{C}} X$ (cf. Siegel [1]).

(b) It follows immediately from Theorem 4.1 that any compact complex manifold $X$ which admits a positive line bundle $L \rightarrow X$ is projective algebraic (and conversely). Namely, in this case, $c_1(L)$ will have a Hodge form as a representative, and thus $X$ will be projective algebraic. This is a very useful version of the theorem, and in this form the theorem has been generalized by Grauert [2] to include the case where $X$ admits singularities. Grauert’s proof can be found in Gunning and Rossi [1], and it depends on the finiteness theorem for strongly pseudoconvex manifolds and spaces.

Proof: By hypothesis, there is a Hodge form $\Omega$ on $X$. By Proposition III.4.6, it follows that there is a holomorphic line bundle $E \rightarrow X$ such that $\Omega$ is a representative for $c

it simply by $m_p^2 (= m_{pp})$, where $m_p$ is the ideal sheaf of germs vanishing to first order at $p$. Then there is an exact sequence of sheaves

$$0 \longrightarrow m_{pq} \longrightarrow \mathcal{O} \longrightarrow \mathcal{O}/m_{pq} \longrightarrow 0,$$

and we can tensor this with the locally free sheaf $\mathcal{O}(F)$ (the sheaf of holomorphic sections of $F$), obtaining

(4.1) $$0 \longrightarrow m_{pq} \otimes_{\mathcal{O}} \mathcal{O}(F) \longrightarrow \mathcal{O}(F) \longrightarrow \mathcal{O}/m_{pq} \otimes_{\mathcal{O}} \mathcal{O}(F) \longrightarrow 0.$$

We see that the quotient sheaf in this sequence becomes

(4.2) $$\mathcal{O}_p/m_p^2 \otimes_{\mathbf{C}} F_p, \quad x = p = q$$

$$0, \quad x \neq p$$

if $p = q$ and

(4.3) $$F_p, \quad x = p$$

$$F_q \quad x = q$$

$$0, \quad x \neq p \text{ or } q$$

if $p \neq q$, where we have used the fact that $\mathcal{O}_p/m_p \cong \mathbf{C}$, where $m_p$ is the maximal ideal in the local ring $\mathcal{O}_p$.

**Lemma 4.2:** $\mathcal{O}_p/m_p^2 \cong \mathbf{C} \oplus T_p^*(X)$, and the quotient mapping is represented by $f \in \mathcal{O}_p \rightarrow f(p) + df(p)$.

**Proof:** If $f \in \mathcal{O}_p$ is expanded in a power series near $z = p$ in local coordinates, we have

$$f(z) = \sum_{|\alpha| \geq 0} \frac{1}{\alpha!} D^\alpha f(p)(z-p)^\alpha,$$

using the standard

Consider now the sequence (4.1) and the induced mapping on global sections

(4.4) $\mathcal{O}(X, F) \xrightarrow{r} \mathcal{O}_p / m_p^2 \otimes F_p$
$$[C \oplus T_p^*(X)] \otimes F_p.$$

If $f$ is a local frame for $F$ near $p$ and if $\xi \in \mathcal{O}(X, F)$, then

$$r(\xi(f)) = (\xi(f)(p), d\xi(f)(p)) \in C \oplus T_p^*(X),$$

noting that $F_p \cong C$, by the choice of a frame $f$. Suppose that the map $r$ in (4.4) is surjective. Then we can find sections $\{\xi_0, \xi_1, \ldots, \xi_n\}$, $\xi_j \in \Gamma(X, F)$, such that

$$\xi_0(p) = 1$$

(4.5) $$\xi_j(p) = 0, \quad j = 1, \ldots, n$$
$$d\xi_j(p) = dz_j \quad (\text{in local coordinates}).$$

This means that the global sections $\xi_1, \ldots, \xi_n$, expressed in terms of the frame $f$, give local coordinates for $X$, in particular, $d\xi_1(f) \wedge \cdots \wedge d\xi_n(f) \neq 0$. Moreover, $\xi_0(p) \neq 0$.

Similarly, suppose that the mapping

(4.6) $$\mathcal{O}(X, F) \xrightarrow{s} F_p \oplus F_q$$

induced from the sheaf sequence (4.3) is surjective. Then we can find global sections $\xi_1$ and $\xi_2$ such that

(4.7) $$\xi_1(p) \neq 0, \quad \xi_1(q) = 0$$
$$\xi_2(p) = 0, \quad \xi_2(q) \neq 0.$$

Lemma 4.3: If the mappings $r$

with

$$\Phi_{\varphi}(x) = [\varphi_0(f)(x), \ldots, \varphi_m(f)(x)].$$

Suppose that the basis $\varphi$ is replaced by another basis, $\tilde{\varphi} = \{\tilde{\varphi}_j\}$, where

$$\tilde{\varphi}_i = \Sigma c_{ij}\varphi_j, \quad c_{ij} \in \mathbf{C},$$

and that the matrix $C = [c_{ij}]$ is nonsingular. Then consider the diagram

$$\begin{array}{ccc}
X & \Phi_{\varphi} & P_m \\
\Phi_{\tilde{\varphi}} & P_m, & C
\end{array}$$

where $C$ is the mapping on $\mathbf{P}_m$ defined by the action of the matrix $C$ on the homogeneous coordinates. The diagram is then commutative, and since $C$ is a biholomorphic mapping, it follows that the holomorphic mapping $\Phi_{\varphi}$ has maximal rank or is an embedding if and only if $\Phi_{\tilde{\varphi}}$ has the same property.

To complete the proof of the lemma, we see that to prove that $\Phi_{\varphi}$ has maximal rank at $p \in X$ it suffices to find a nice choice of basis $\varphi$ which demonstrates this property. By hypothesis, the mapping $r$ in (4.4) is surjective, and it follows that we can find sections $\xi_0, \xi_1, \ldots, \xi_n \in \mathcal{O}(X, F)$ satisfying the conditions in (4.5). It is easy to verify that $\xi_0, \xi_1, \ldots, \xi_n$ are linearly independent in the vector space $\mathcal{O}(X, F)$ and that we can extend them to a basis, $\tilde{\varphi}$. Then the mapping $\Phi_{\tilde{\varphi}}$ is defined, in terms of the frame used in (4.5), by

$$\Phi_{\tilde{\varphi}}(x) = [\xi_0(f)(x), \xi_1(f)(x), \ldots, \xi_n(f)(x), \ldots],$$

and using the local coordinates

$$(1,

The following lemma will then complete the proof of Theorem 4.1.

Lemma 4.4: The mappings $r$ and $s$ in (4.4) and (4.6) are surjective for all points $p$ and $q \in X$.

Proof: Consider first the mapping $r$ in (4.4). Let $\tilde{X} = Q_p X$ and let $S = \pi_p^{-1}(p)$. Then let $\mathcal{I}_S$ be the ideal sheaf of the submanifold $S \subset \tilde{X}$, i.e., the sheaf of holomorphic functions on $\tilde{X}$ which vanish along $S$. Let $\mathcal{I}_S^2$ be the ideal sheaf of holomorphic functions on $\tilde{X}$ which vanish to second order along $S$, i.e., $f_x \in \mathcal{I}_S^2$ if $f_x = (g_x)^2$, where $g_x \in \mathcal{I}_S_x$. Let $\tilde{\mathcal{O}} = \mathcal{O}_{\tilde{X}}$ be the structure sheaf for $\tilde{X}$, let $\mathcal{O} = \mathcal{O}_X$ be the structure sheaf for $X$, and let $\tilde{F} = \pi^* F$. Then we have the exact sequence of sheaves over $\tilde{X}$ (tensor products are over the structure sheaves),

(4.8) $0 \longrightarrow \tilde{\mathcal{O}}(\tilde{F}) \otimes \mathcal{I}_S^2 \longrightarrow \tilde{\mathcal{O}}(\tilde{F}) \longrightarrow \tilde{\mathcal{O}}(\tilde{F}) \otimes \tilde{\mathcal{O}}/ \mathcal{I}_S^2 \longrightarrow 0,$ and the mapping $\pi_p$ induces a commutative diagram

$$\begin{array}{ccc}
0 & \longrightarrow \tilde{\mathcal{O}}(\tilde{F}) \otimes \mathcal{I}_S^2 & \longrightarrow \tilde{\mathcal{O}}(\tilde{F}) \longrightarrow \tilde{\mathcal{O}}(\tilde{F}) \otimes \tilde

which is a well-defined element of $\Gamma(X - \{p\}, \mathcal{O}(F))$. Then by Hartogs’ theorem, there is a unique extension of $\tilde{\beta}(\xi)$ to a section of $\mathcal{O}(F)$ on $X$, which we call $\beta(\xi)$. Clearly, we have that $\beta^{-1} = \pi_p^*$ and hence $\beta$ is an isomorphism. Moreover, as noted above $\beta^{-1}(\eta)$ will vanish to second order along $S$ if and only if $\eta \in \Gamma(X, \mathcal{O}(F) \otimes m_p^2)$.

It thus remains to show that

(4.11) $H^1(\tilde{X}, \mathcal{O}(\tilde{F}) \otimes \mathcal{I}_S^2) = 0$.

To do this, we note that $\mathcal{I}_S$ is a locally free sheaf of rank 1, since it is the ideal sheaf of a divisor in $\tilde{X}$. Moreover, any locally free sheaf corresponds to the sheaf of sections of a vector bundle, and we see that in fact

$\mathcal{I}_S \cong \mathcal{O}(L^*)$,

where $L$ is the line bundle associated to the divisor $S \subset \tilde{X}$. This is easy to check by verifying that $L^*$ and $\mathcal{I}_S$ have the same transition functions in terms of the coverings of $S$ used in Sec. 3 in its coordinate representation as a subset of $W \subset U \times \mathbf{P}_{n-1}$. Moreover, one also has $\mathcal{I}_S^2 \cong \mathcal{O}((L^*)^2)$, and then we see that

$H^1(\tilde{X}, \mathcal{O}(\tilde{F}) \otimes \mathcal{I}_S^2) = H^1(\tilde{X}, \mathcal{O}(\tilde{F} \otimes (L^*)^2))$.

But, by hypothesis, $F = E^\mu$, where $\mu > \mu_0$, and by Proposition 3.3(b)

$\tilde{F} \otimes (

This is the approach taken by Grauert [2] and gives an alternative proof of the embedding theorem. Namely, Grauert proves the more general vanishing theorem: If $E$ is a positive line bundle and $\mathcal{F}$ is any coherent analytic sheaf, then there is an integer $\mu_0 > 0$ so that

$$H^q(X, \mathcal{O}(E^\mu) \otimes \mathcal{F}) = 0$$

for $\mu \geq \mu_0$ and $q \geq 1$. This result is derived from the general theory of coherent analytic sheaves on pseudoconvex analytic spaces and involves, in particular, Grauert’s solution to the Levi problem (Grauert [1]; see Gunning and Rossi [1] for this derivation). Moreover, one needs to know that the ideal sheaves $m_p^2$ and $m_{pq}$ are coherent analytic sheaves (which for these particular ideals sheaves is not too difficult to prove). Kodaira’s approach, which we have followed here, says, in effect, that if you blow up the points $p$ appropriately, then the coherent sheaves $m_p^2$ and $m_{pq}$ become locally free on the blown up complex manifold $\tilde{X}$, and then the theory of harmonic differential forms (which applies at this time only to locally free sheaves, i.e., vector bundles) can be applied to give the desired vanishing theorems. To prove Grauert’s vanishing theorem via harmonic theory, it is necessary to first obtain a projective embedding; then, by finding a global projective resolution of the given coherent sheaf by locally free sheaves (which follows from the work of Serre [2]), one can deduce Grauert’s result (see Griffiths [1] for this derivation).

A recent generalization of Kodaira’s vanishing and embedding theorems to Moishezon spaces (generalizations of projective algebraic spaces) by Grauert and Riemenschneider [2] and Riemenschneider [1] has involved the approach used by Kodaira presented here, combined with the theory of coherent analytic sheaves on pseudoconvex spaces.

MODULI SPACES
AND
GEOMETRIC STRUCTURES

1. Introduction

Moduli spaces arise naturally in classification problems in geometry. Typically, one has a collection of objects and an equivalence relation, and the problem is to describe the set of equivalence classes. Usually, there are discrete invariants that partition this set in a countable number of subsets. In most cases there exist continuous families of objects, and one would like to give the set of equivalence classes some geometric structure to reflect this fact. This is the object of the theory of moduli spaces.

The word moduli is due to Riemann†, who used it as a synonym for parameters when showing that the space of equivalence classes of Riemann surfaces of a given genus $g$ depends on $3g - 3$ complex numbers. After this, the concept of moduli has been used in geometry in a rather loose sense to measure variations of geometric structures of one kind or another, but it has not been however until the 1960s that one has been able to formulate moduli problems in precise terms and in some cases to obtain solutions to them.

The study of moduli spaces has a local and a global aspect. While the local theory progressed through the initial work of Kodaira–Spencer and the contributions of Kuranishi, and others, the global theory, with the proper definition of moduli spaces and how to construct them is due to Mumford [25] based on Grothendieck’s theory of schemes.

In this appendix we are concerned with moduli spaces of holomorphic vector bundles and Higgs bundles over a Riemann surface, as well as related structures, like connections and representations of the fundamental group of the surface. These moduli spaces play a very prominent role in algebraic geometry, differential geometry, topology and theoretical physics. The emphasis here is not so much on the construction of these moduli spaces

*Instituto de Ciencias Matemáticas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Serrano, 121, 28006 Madrid, Spain.

†“hängt ...von $3g - 3$ stetig veränderliche Grössen ab, welche die Moduln dieser Klasse gennant werden sollen” [32].<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>

as on the correspondences among them and the geometric structures that they carry. Our goal is to review some developments in the theory that have taken place mostly since the beginning of the 1980s, including some more recent progress. Naturally, due to space limitations, we do this in a rather scketchy way, avoiding many technical aspects and omitting most proofs, but trying to address the reader to the main bibliography in the subject.

In section 2 we study the moduli space of holomorphic vector bundles. After the classification of holomorphic vector bundles for genus 0 by Grothendieck [16] and genus 1 by Atiyah [2], vector bundles on higher genus Riemann surfaces have been studied extensively with the fundamental work of Mumford [25] and of Narasimhan and Seshadri [28], who defined the concept of a stable vector bundle and constructed the moduli spaces which classify these bundles. In their theorem Narasimhan and Seshadri [28] identified the moduli space of stable vector bundles over a compact Riemann surface with the moduli space of irreducible projective unitary representations of the fundamental group of the surface (or equivalently, unitary representations of the universal central extension of the fundamental group). Donaldson [10] gave another proof of this theorem, which we briefly scketch, following the gauge-theoretic point of view of Atiyah and Bott [4], where these representatations are identified with projectively flat connections.

A Higgs bundle over a Riemann surface is a pair consisting of a holomorphic vector bundle and an endomorphism of the bundle twisted with the canonical line bundle of the surface — the Higgs field. Higgs bundles were introduced by Hitchin [17] in the study of self-duality equations. They are the holomorphic objects corresponding to complex representations of the fundamental group which are not necessarily unitary. In fact when the Higgs field vanishes, one recovers unitary representations. To establish this correspondence requires two fundamental theorems: one proving the existence of a solution to Hitchin equations on a stable Higgs bundle [17, 34, 35], which we explain in Section 3, and another one, studied in Sections 4 and 5, proving

structures induced by the complex structure of the Riemann surface. Moreover, they also have a symplectic structure, which is in fact compatible with the complex structure, endowing the moduli spaces with a Kähler structure. One way to see this, is to exhibit the moduli space as a symplectic and Kähler quotient. This point of view, initiated by Atiyah and Bott [4], is studied in Section 7, where we see that the gauge-theoretic equations defining the moduli space can be interpreted as the vanishing of the moment map for a symplectic action of the gauge group on the space of connections and Higgs fields. In the case of Higgs bundles, more is actually true. The complex structure of GL(n, C) defines an additional complex structure on the moduli space, which combined with the one induced by the surface give rise to a hyperkähler structure that can be obtained as a hyperkähler quotient.

We finish in Section 8 by briefly studying a generalization to higher dimensional compact Kähler manifolds of some of the previous results. We first explain the Hitchin–Kobayashi correspondence between stable vector bundles and Hermitian–Einstein connections, proved by Donaldson [12, 13] and Uhlenbeck and Yau [38], and then finish with the higher dimensional version of the non-abelian Hodge theory correspondence, due to Simpson [34, 35] and Corlette [8].

We follow the notation of the book.

Acknowledgements. First of all I want to thank Ronny Wells for having invited me to write this appendix for the third edition of his book. I must confess that I have always been very embarrassed by the certainty that the appendix could never approach the quality and elegance of Ronny’s text. I hope, however, that the reader finds the topics presented here stimulating enough to pursue further study of a subject whose basics are so beautifully treated in Ronny’s book. I have a great debt to Nigel Hitchin and Simon Donaldson, from whom I have learned the subject treated here. Thanks are also due to Steve Bradlow and Peter Gothen, my collaborators in the original work on U(p, q) reviewed in this appendix. I am very grateful to my students, Á

line bundles on $X$, where the group structure is given by the tensor product of line bundles. This group is called the Picard group of $X$. If we fix the first Chern class — which we will call degree from now on — to be $d$, then $\text{Pic}^d(X)$ is the set of equivalence classes of line bundles of degree $d$. In particular, $J(X) := \text{Pic}^0(X)$ is a subgroup of $H^1(X, \mathbb{O}^*)$, which is called the Jacobian of $X$. The group $J(X)$ has the structure of a complex abelian variety (see Remark (a) on page 234), whose dimension is equal to the genus of $X$, and it is very important in the study of the geometry of the Riemann surface [1].

The problem we will address now is that of classifying isomorphism classes of holomorphic vector bundles of arbitrary rank on a compact Riemann surface $X$. This is a much harder problem than that of line bundles, basically due to the fact that this set is no longer a group. As in the case of line bundles, $C^\infty$ vector bundles are classified by the first Chern class, and hence an equivalence class of $C^\infty$ vector bundles is determined by the rank $n$ and the degree $d$.

For genus zero, Grothendieck [16] showed that every holomorphic vector bundle on $\mathbf{P}_1(\mathbf{C})$ is a direct sum of holomorphic line bundles, and it is hence determined by the degrees of these line bundles. The case of a genus one surface (a torus) was studied by Atiyah [2], who showed that the set of equivalence classes of indecomposable vector bundles with fixed rank and degree is isomorphic to the surface itself. We will then assume most of the time that the genus of $X$ is greater than one.

We will look now at holomorphic vector bundles from the point of view of $\partial$-operators, which will be more adapted to our approach. As we have seen in Sec. 3 of Chap. II, a holomorphic vector bundle $E$ on a complex manifold $X$ defines a C-linear

structures on $\mathbb{E}$. A holomorphic bundle $E$ can be then thought of as a pair $(\mathbb{E}, \overline{\partial}_E)$. The group $\mathcal{G}^c$ of automorphisms of the vector bundle $\mathbb{E}$ acts on $\mathcal{C}$ by the rule:

$$g \cdot \overline{\partial}_E = g \overline{\partial}_E g^{-1}, \quad \text{where} \quad g \in \mathcal{G}^c \quad \text{and} \quad \overline{\partial}_E \in \mathcal{C},$$

and the above correspondence can be made precise in the following.

**Proposition 2.1:** The quotient $\mathcal{C}/\mathcal{G}^c$ can be identified with the set of isomorphism classes of holomorphic vector bundles of rank $n$ and degree $d$.

The set $\mathcal{C}/\mathcal{G}^c$ can be endowed with the $C^\infty$ topology, although for technical reasons one should consider appropriate Sobolev spaces instead of the $C^\infty$ topology. It turns out that this space is in general non-Hausdorff (see [28]), but a “good” space is obtained if we consider only (semi)stable holomorphic structures.

Let $E = (\mathbb{E}, \overline{\partial}_E)$ be a holomorphic vector bundle over a compact Riemann surface $X$. Let $\deg(E)$ be the degree of $E$ (i.e., the first Chern class $c_1(E)$). The slope of $E$ is defined as

$$\mu(E) = \deg E / \text{rank } E.$$

The vector bundle $E$ is stable if for every proper subbundle $F \subset E$

$$\mu(F) < \mu(E).$$

This concept arises naturally from Mumford’s Geometric Invariant Theory (GIT, see [25]).

Let

$$\mathcal{C}^s = \{ \overline{\partial}_E \in \mathcal{C} : E = (\mathbb{E}, \overline{\partial}_E) \text{ is stable} \}$$

The moduli space of stable vector bundles of rank $n$ and degree $d

isomorphic to $\mathcal{E}^{0,1}(X, \text{End } \mathbb{E})$. Notice that in higher dimensions, the equation $\overline{\partial}_E^2 = 0$ is not automatically satisfied, and it is not difficult to show that the tangent space to the space of $\overline{\partial}_E$ operators satisfying $\overline{\partial}_E^2 = 0$ is the kernel of the map

$$\overline{\partial}_E: \mathcal{E}^{0,1}(X, \text{End } \mathbb{E}) \longrightarrow \mathcal{E}^{0,2}(X, \text{End } \mathbb{E}).$$

Here we are abusing notation since the $\overline{\partial}$-operator associated to $\text{End } \mathbb{E} = \mathbb{E} \otimes \mathbb{E}^*$ is $\overline{\partial}_E \otimes I_{E^*} + I_E \otimes \overline{\partial}_{E^*}$, and $\overline{\partial}_{E^*}$ is naturally induced by $\overline{\partial}_E$.

Now, if a curve $\overline{\partial}_E(t) = \overline{\partial}_E + t\alpha$ in $\mathcal{C}$ for $|t| < \epsilon$ is obtained by a 1-parameter family of gauge transformations $g_t \in \mathcal{G}^c$, so that

$$\overline{\partial}_E(t) = g_t \overline{\partial}_E g_t^{-1}, \quad \text{with} \quad g_0 = I_{\mathbb{E}},$$

then $\alpha = -\overline{\partial}_E a$, where $a = \partial_t g_t|_{t=0}$. That is, $a$ is an element of the tangent space at the identity of the infinite dimensional Lie group $\mathcal{G}^c$, which is isomorphic to $\mathcal{E}^{0}(X, \text{End } \mathbb{E})$. Hence the “tangent space” at a point $[\overline{\partial}_E] \in \mathcal{C}/\mathcal{G}^c$ is isomorphic to

$$H^1(X, \text{End } E) = \frac{\{\alpha \in \mathcal{E}^{0

The manifold $M^s(n, d)$ is not compact in general. However it can be compactified by considering semistable vector bundles (it is indeed this compactification which is obtained by GIT). A vector bundle $E$ is semistable if for every subbundle $F \subset E$

$$\mu(F) \leq \mu(E).$$

Another concept which is relevant here is that of polystability. The vector bundle $E$ is polystable if $E = \oplus E_i$, where $E_i$ is stable and $\mu(E_i) = \mu(E)$. A polystable bundle is in particular semistable.

Let $E$ be a semistable vector bundle. If $E$ is not stable, then there exists a stable subbundle $F \subset E$, such that $\mu(F) = \mu(E)$. Since $E/F$ is semistable with $\mu(E/F) = \mu(E)$, this process can be iterated, to obtain a filtration of $E$ (Jordan–Hölder filtration) by semistable vector bundles $E_j$,

$$0 = E_0 \subset E_1 \subset \ldots \subset E_m = E,$$

such that $E_j/E_{j-1}$ is stable and $\mu(E_j/E_{j-1}) = \mu(E)$ for $1 \leq j \leq m$. The graded vector bundle associated to $E$ is defined as

$$\text{gr}(E) = \bigoplus_j E_j/E_{j-1}.$$

Although, this is not uniquely defined, its isomorphism class is. Two semistable vector bundles $E$ and $E'$ are said to be $S$-equivalent if $\text{gr}(E) \cong \text{gr}(E')$. The moduli space of semistable vector bundles $M(n, d)$ of rank $n$ and degree $d$ is defined as the set of $S$-equivalence classes of semistable bundles of rank $n$ and degree $d$. Note that, since the graded vector bundle associated to a semistable bundle is polystable, $M(n, d)$ coincides with the set of isomorphism classes

2.2. Stable Bundles and Connections

We will see now that the stability of a holomorphic vector bundle emerges also from a differential-geometric point of view in relation to the existence of a certain class of Hermitian metrics on the bundle.

Let $E$ be a holomorphic vector bundle over $X$ and let $h$ be a Hermitian metric on $E$. Let $D$ be the canonical connection on $E$ defined by $h$, and let $\Theta(D) = D^2$ be its curvature (see Chap. III, Sec. 2).

The connection $D$ is said to be flat if $\Theta(D) = 0$. From Chern-Weil theory (Chap. III, Sec. 3), we know that the flatness of $D$ implies that the first Chern class of $E$ must be zero. If $c_1(E) \neq 0$, then the closest to flatness that we can have is that the curvature be central. To formulate this condition, it is convenient to fix a Hermitian metric on $X$. Since the dimension of $X$ is one, such a metric is always Kähler (Chap. V, Sec. 4). Let $\Omega$ be its Kähler form. We will normalize this metric so that $X$ has volume $2\pi$, i.e., $\int_X \Omega = 2\pi$.

Now, we say that $D$ has constant central curvature if

(2.1) $$\Theta(D) = -i\mu I_E \Omega,$$

where $I_E$ is the identity endomorphism of $E$ and $\mu$ is a real constant. Taking the trace in (2.1), integrating and using that

$$c_1(E) = \frac{i}{2\pi} \int_X \text{Tr}(\Theta(D))$$

(Chap. III, Sec. 3) we have that

$$\mu = \mu(E) = \deg E / \text{rank} E.$$

Condition (2.1) can be better understood in terms of principal bundles. To do this, we briefly recall some basic facts about principal bundles. Let $G$ be a Lie group. A principal $G$-b

Given a principal $G$-bundle $P$ over $X$ and a representation $\rho : G \rightarrow \text{GL}(\mathbf{V})$ of $G$ on a complex vector space $\mathbf{V}$, one can associate to it a complex vector bundle defined by

$$\mathbb{V} = (P \times \mathbf{V}) / G,$$

where $G$ acts on $P$ on the right, and on $\mathbf{V}$ on the left, via the representation $\rho$. Conversely, if $\mathbb{E}$ is a smooth complex vector bundle of rank $n$ over $X$, we obtain a principal bundle $P$ with structure group $\text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$ by taking the set of all frames in $\mathbb{E}$. A point in the fibre of $P$ over $x \in X$ is a set of basis vectors for $E_x$. A connection on the principal bundle $P$ induces a connection on the vector bundle $\mathbb{E}$, and viceversa (see e.g. [11, 20]).

If the Lie group $G$ is complex, all the constructions above on principal bundles can also be done in the holomorphic category.

Now, condition (2.1) is equivalent to saying that $D$ is projectively flat, which means that $D$ induces a flat connection on the $\text{PGL}(n, \mathbf{C})$-principal bundle $\hat{P}$ associated to the $\text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$-principal bundle $P$ defined by $E$, where $\hat{P} = P / \mathbf{C}^* I_n$.

To analyse the relation with stability, we consider a holomorphic sub-bundle $F \subset E$ and the quotient vector bundle $Q = E/F$. These fit in an exact sequence

(2.3) $$0 \rightarrow F \rightarrow E \rightarrow Q \rightarrow 0.$$

The Hermitian metric $h$ on $E$ defines a smooth splitting (not necessarily holomorphic) of this sequence

$$E \cong F \oplus Q,$$

with respect to which we can write

(2.4) $$\bar{\partial}_E = \begin{pmatrix} \

where $D_F$ and $D_Q$ are the canonical connections defined by the Hermitian metrics on $F$ and $Q$, respectively, induced by $h$, and $\beta^* \in \mathcal{E}^{1,0}(X, \text{Hom}(F, Q))$ is obtained from $\beta$ by combining the conjugation on the form part and the conjugate-linear bundle isomorphism between $\text{Hom}(Q, F)$ and $\text{Hom}(F, Q)$, defined by the Hermitian metric (Chap. V, Sec. 2).

Now, the curvature of $D$ is given by

$$\Theta(D) = \begin{pmatrix}
\Theta(D_F) - \beta \wedge \beta^* & D' \beta \\
-D'' \beta^* & \Theta(D_Q) - \beta^* \wedge \beta
\end{pmatrix}.$$

We can now prove the following.

**Proposition 2.5:** Let $E$ be a holomorphic vector bundle over $X$. Let $h$ be a Hermitian metric on $E$, such that the canonical connection satisfies (2.1). Then $E$ is polystable.

**Proof:** Suppose that $D$ satisfies (2.1). Let $F \subset E$ be a holomorphic subbundle and let $Q = E/F$. From (2.6) we have that

$$\Theta(D_F) - \beta \wedge \beta^* = -i\mu I_F \Omega.$$

Now, taking the trace of this equation, multiplying by $i/2\pi$ and integrating over $X$ we have

$$\frac{i}{2\pi} \int_X \text{Tr}(\Theta(D_F)) + \int_X |\beta|^2 \Omega = \mu \text{rank } F,$$

where we have used that $-i/2\pi \text{Tr}(\beta \wedge \beta^*) = |\beta|^2 \Omega$ (Chap. V, Sec. 2). Since $\text{deg}(F) = i/2\pi \int_X \text{Tr}(\Theta(D_F))

To be more precise, let $\mathbb{E}$ be a smooth complex vector bundle over $X$. Let $h$ be a Hermitian metric on $\mathbb{E}$. Let $\mathcal{A}$ be the set of all connections on $\mathbb{E}$, which are compatible with $h$. The gauge group $\mathcal{G}$ of $(\mathbb{E}, h)$ is the subgroup of $\mathcal{G}^c$ consisting of those automorphisms of $\mathbb{E}$ that preserve $h$. The group $\mathcal{G}$ acts on $\mathcal{A}$ as follows:

$$g \cdot D = gDg^{-1}, \quad \text{where} \quad g \in \mathcal{G} \quad \text{and} \quad D \in \mathcal{A}.$$

The connection $D \in \mathcal{A}$ has constant central curvature if

(2.7) $$\Theta(D) = \lambda,$$

where

(2.8) $$\lambda = -i\mu(\mathbb{E})I_{\mathbb{E}}\Omega.$$

This equation is invariant under the action of $\mathcal{G}$ and then, if we set

(2.9) $$\mathcal{A}_0 = \{D \in \mathcal{A} : \Theta(D) = \lambda\},$$

the quotient $\mathcal{A}_0/\mathcal{G}$ is the moduli space of constant central curvature connections on $(\mathbb{E}, h)$.

Indeed, solving (2.1) for a Hermitian metric on a fixed holomorphic vector bundle $E$ is equivalent to fixing a Hermitian metric on the smooth bundle $\mathbb{E}$, and then solving for a Hermitian connection satisfying (2.7).

To show this, we note that the space of Hermitian metrics on $\mathbb{E}$ is the space of global sections of the $\text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})/U(n)$-bundle associated to the principal $\text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$-bundle of frames of $\mathbb{E}$, which in turn, by fixing $h$, can be identified with the symmetric space $\mathcal{G}^c/\mathcal{G}$, where $\mathcal{G}$ is the gauge group of $(\mathbb{E},

Consider now the map

(2.10) $\mathcal{A} \longrightarrow \mathcal{C}$
$D \longmapsto D''$

where $D''$ is the projection of $D$ into the $(0,1)$-part (Chap. 3, Sec. 2). Theorem 2.1 in Chap. III. establishes that this map is an isomorphism.

Proposition 2.5 can be now reformulated as giving one direction of the following.

Theorem 2.7: The map (2.10) restricted to $\mathcal{A}_0$ has its image in the subspace $\mathcal{C}^{ps} \subset \mathcal{C}$ of polystable holomorphic structures, and descends to give a homeomorphism

(2.11) $\mathcal{A}_0 / \mathcal{G} \cong \mathcal{C}^{ps} / \mathcal{G}^c$.

Moreover, this restricts to give a homeomorphism

(2.12) $\mathcal{A}_0^* / \mathcal{G} \cong \mathcal{C}^s / \mathcal{G}^c$.

This is the theorem of Narasimhan and Seshadri [28]. The formulation in [28] is in terms of representations of the fundamental group of the surface but, as we will see in Section 4, this is equivalent. Here we follow the approach of Atiyah–Bott [4] and Donaldson [10].

It is enough to prove surjectivity for (2.12). The polystable case can easily be reduced to the stable one. We just mention the main ideas of the proof given by Donaldson [10]. Let $D \in \mathcal{A}$ be the Hermitian connection corresponding to $\bar{\partial}_E$. The theorem says that, even though $D$ may not satisfy (2.7), in the $\mathcal{G}^c$-orbit $\mathcal{O}(D)$ of $D$ (where the action is via the identification of $\mathcal{A}$ with $\mathcal{C}$) we can find a connection which does satisfy (2.7), which is unique up to gauge transformations in $\mathcal{G}$. We suppose inductively that the result has been proved for bundles

the group actions and properties of curvature that we use extend without essential change (in particular $W^2 \subset C^0$, so the topology of the bundle is preserved), and it is proved in [4] that each $W^1$ connection defines a holomorphic structure.

3. Higgs Bundles on Riemann Surfaces

3.1. Moduli Spaces of Higgs Bundles

There are many natural gauge-theoretic equations similar to (2.7) which involve also Higgs fields. These are simply sections of a certain vector bundle naturally associated to the original vector bundle. As for equation (2.7), the existence of solutions is related to some stability condition. Some of these equations arise from considering solutions to the Yang-Mills equations which are invariant under a certain symmetry group—a mechanism known in gauge theory as dimensional reduction. An important example is provided by the theory of Higgs bundles introduced by Hitchin [17].

Let $X$ be a compact Riemann surface. A Higgs bundle over $X$ is a pair consisting of a holomorphic vector bundle $E \rightarrow X$ together with a sheaf homomorphism — the Higgs field — $\Phi : E \rightarrow E \otimes K$, where $K$ is the canonical line bundle of $X$, i.e.

$$\Phi \in H^0(X, \text{End } E \otimes K).$$

The Higgs bundle $(E, \Phi)$ is said to be stable if

$$\mu(F) < \mu(E)$$

for every proper subbundle $F \subset E$ such that $\Phi(F) \subset F \otimes K$. Semistability, polystability, Jordan–Hölder filtrations and $S$-equivalence are defined in a similar way to vector bundles. Clearly, if $E$ is stable, $(E, \Phi)$ is a stable Higgs bundle for every $\Phi \in H^0(X, \text{End } E \otimes K)$.

The moduli space of stable Higgs bundles $\mathcal{M}^s(n, d)$ is defined as the set of isomorphism classes of stable Higgs bundles $(E, \Phi)$ with rank $E = n$ and deg $E = d$.

Similarly to the vector bundle case, if $n$ and $d$ are coprime $\mathcal{M}(n, d) \cong \mathcal{M}^s(n, d)$. Notice that the dimension of $\mathcal{M}^s(n, d)$ is twice that of the moduli space of stable vector bundles $M^s(n, d)$. In fact $\mathcal{M}^s(n, d)$ contains as an open subset the cotangent bundle of $M^s(n, d)$. Indeed, let $[E] \in M^s(n, d)$. The cotangent space to $M^s(n, d)$ at $[E]$, as we saw in Section 2.1, is isomorphic to $H^1(X, \text{End } E)^*$. But, by Serre duality

$$H^1(X, \text{End } E)^* \cong H^0(X, \text{End } E \otimes K),$$

and hence the Higgs field is an element of the cotangent space $T^*_{[E]} M^s(n, d)$. But, as mentioned above, if $E$ is stable then $(E, \Phi)$ is stable for every $\Phi \in H^0(X, \text{End } E \otimes K)$. In particular, $\mathcal{M}(1, d) = T^* \text{Pic}^d(X)$.

The moduli space of stable Higgs bundles can also be described in differential-geometric terms, using $\partial$ operators. To do that, let $\mathbb{E}$ be a smooth complex vector bundle over $X$ of rank $n$ and degree $d$. Consider the set of pairs

(3.1) $$\mathcal{H} = \{(\bar{\partial}_E, \Phi) \in \mathcal{C} \times \mathcal{E}^{1,0}(X, \text{End } \mathbb{E}) : \bar{\partial}_E \Phi = 0\}.$$

Using appropriate Sobolev metrics $\mathcal{C} \times \mathcal{E}^{1,0}(X, \text{End } \mathbb{E})$ can be endowed with the structure of an infinite dimensional manifold and $\

We have that $\mathcal{H} = f_1^{-1}(0)$. Now, let $(\bar{\partial}_E, \Phi) \in \mathcal{H}$. Let $f_0$ be the map in (3.2) defined by this element. Let $D_0 = Df_0(I)$ and $D_1 = Df_1(\bar{\partial}_E, \Phi)$ be the differentials of $f_0$ and $f_1$ at $I \in \mathcal{G}^c$ and our fixed element $(\bar{\partial}_E, \Phi)$, respectively. We have the complex

(3.3) $C^\bullet : 0 \rightarrow \mathcal{E}^0(X, \text{End } \mathbb{E}) \xrightarrow{D_0} \mathcal{E}^{0,1}(X, \text{End } \mathbb{E}) \oplus \mathcal{E}^{1,0}(X, \text{End } \mathbb{E})$
$\xrightarrow{D_1} \mathcal{E}^{1,1}(X, \text{End } \mathbb{E}) \rightarrow 0,$

where

(3.4) $D_0(\psi) = (\bar{\partial}_E \psi, [\Phi, \psi])$
(3.5) $D_1(\alpha, \varphi) = \bar{\partial}_E \varphi + [\alpha, \Phi].$

This complex is elliptic since it is the sum of two elliptic complexes. Let $H^i(C^\bullet)$ be the cohomology groups of the complex (3.3). We have the following ([17, 31]).

**Proposition 3.2:**

(1) The space of endomorphisms of $(E, \Phi)$ is isomorphic to $H^0(C^\bullet)$.
(2) The space of infinitesimal deformations of $(E, \Phi)$ is isomorphic to $H^1(C^\bullet)$.
(3) There is a long exact sequence

(3.6) $0 \rightarrow H^0(C^\bullet) \rightarrow H^0(\text{End

3.2. Hitchin Equations

The stability of a Higgs bundle is linked, as we have already mentioned, to the existence of solutions to a certain equation. Let $(E, \Phi)$ be a Higgs bundle. Let $h$ be a Hermitian metric on $E$, with canonical connection $D$ and curvature $\Theta(D)$. A natural condition to ask is that the metric satisfy the Hitchin equation:

$$\Theta(D) + [\Phi, \Phi^*] = -i\mu I_E \Omega,$$

where $[\Phi, \Phi^*] = \Phi\Phi^* + \Phi^*\Phi$ is the usual extension of the Lie bracket to Lie-algebra valued forms. Since $\operatorname{Tr}[\Phi, \Phi^*] = 0$, as in (2.7), $\mu = \mu(E)$. We have the following.

Theorem 3.3: Let $(E, \Phi)$ be a Higgs bundle such that there is a Hermitian metric on $E$ satisfying (3.7). Then $(E, \Phi)$ is polystable. Conversely, if $(E, \Phi)$ is stable, then there exists a Hermitian metric on $E$ satisfying (3.7).

This theorem is proved by Hitchin [17] for $n = 2$ and by Simpson [34, 35] for arbitrary rank (he also gives a generalization for a higher dimensional Kähler manifold, which we will mention in Section 8).

The proof of how polystability follows from (3.7) is very similar to the one given in Proposition 2.5. Suppose that $h$ is a Hermitian metric satisfying (3.7). Let $F \subset E$ be a holomorphic subbundle such that $\Phi(F) \subset F \otimes K$, and let $Q = E/F$. In terms of the $C^\infty$ splitting $E \cong F \oplus Q$ defined by $h$, the Higgs field can be written as

$$\Phi = \begin{pmatrix} \Phi_F & \theta \\ 0 & \Phi_Q \

To prove the existence result, it is convenient, as in the case of vector bundles, to look at Theorem 3.3 as a correspondence between moduli spaces. To do this, let $\mathbb{E}$ be a smooth complex vector bundle over $X$ of rank $n$ and degree $d$. Let $h$ be a Hermitian metric on $\mathbb{E}$. Let $\mathcal{A}$ be the set of all connections on $\mathbb{E}$ which are compatible with $h$, and let $\mathcal{X} = \mathcal{A} \times \mathcal{E}^{1,0}(X, \text{End } \mathbb{E})$. The Hitchin equation on a Higgs bundle (3.7) can be rephrased by requiring the pair $(D, \Phi) \in \mathcal{X}$ to satisfy

$$\Theta(D) + [\Phi, \Phi^*] = \lambda$$
$$\bar{\partial}_E \Phi = 0,$$

where $\bar{\partial}_E = D''$ is the holomorphic structure defined by $D$, and $\lambda$ is given by (2.8). The second equation simply says that $\Phi$ is holomorphic with respect to this holomorphic structure, and hence the pair $(E, \Phi)$ is a Higgs bundle, where $E = (\mathbb{E}, \bar{\partial}_E)$. Consider the set of all solutions to (3.9):

$$\mathcal{X}_0 = \{(D, \Phi) \in \mathcal{X} = \mathcal{A} \times \mathcal{E}^{1,0}(X, \text{End } \mathbb{E}) \text{ satisfying (3.9)}\}.$$

The set $\mathcal{X}_0$ is invariant under the action of $\mathcal{G}$ — the gauge group of $(\mathbb{E}, h)$, and the moduli space of solutions to Hitchin equations is defined as the quotient $\mathcal{X}_0/\mathcal{G}$.

A pair $(D, \Phi) \in \mathcal{X}$ is said to be reducible if $(\mathbb{E}, h) = (\mathbb{E}_1, h_1) \oplus (\mathbb{E

We have proved one direction of this correspondence. To prove the converse, one has to show that in the $\mathcal{G}^c$-orbit of any element $(\bar{\partial}_{E_0}, \Phi_0) \in \mathcal{H}_s$ we can find an element $(\bar{\partial}_E, \Phi)$, unique up to gauge transformations in $\mathcal{G}$, whose corresponding (irreducible) pair $(D, \Phi)$ (under the correspondence between $\mathcal{A}$ and $\mathcal{C}$) satisfies (3.9). As in the case of Theorem 2.7, we need to work with Sobolev spaces and consider $W^1$ connections and $W^1$ Higgs fields, as well as $W^2$ gauge transformations. To find a solution one considers a minimizing sequence $(D_n, \Phi_n)$ for the functional $\|\Theta(D) + [\Phi, \Phi^*]\|_{L^2}^2$ defined on the $\mathcal{G}^c$-orbit of $(D_0, \Phi_0)$. In particular one has $\|\Theta(D) + [\Phi, \Phi^*]\|_{L^2}^2 < C$. From this, and from $L^2$ bounds that one can obtain for $\Phi_n$, one obtains $L^2$ bounds for $\Theta(D_n)$, from which it follows, by a theorem of Uhlenbeck [37], that there are gauge transformations $g_n \in \mathcal{G}$ for which $g_n \cdot D_n$ has a weakly convergent subsequence. It is not difficult to find $W^1$ bounds for $\Phi_n$, to conclude that $(D_n, \Phi_n)$ (after renaming) converges to a solution $(D, \Phi)$. To complete the proof one shows that $(D, \Phi)$ is in the same orbit as $(D_0, \Phi_0)$ (see [17, 34] for details).

4. Representations of the Fundamental Group

4.1. Connections and Representations

Let $\mathbb{E}$ be a $C^\infty$ complex vector bundle of rank $n$

Conversely, given a representation $\rho : \pi_1(X, x_0) \rightarrow \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$, one can construct a vector bundle $\mathbb{E}$ of rank $n$ with a flat connection by setting

$$\mathbb{E} = \tilde{X} \times_{\rho} \mathbf{C}^n,$$

where $\tilde{X}$ is the universal cover of $X$ and $\tilde{X} \times_{\rho} \mathbf{C}^n$ is the quotient of $\tilde{X} \times \mathbf{C}^n$ by the action of $\pi_1(X, x)$ given by $(y, v) \mapsto (\gamma(y), \rho(\gamma)v)$ for $\gamma \in \pi_1(X, x)$ (regarded as the covering transformation group acting on $\tilde{X}$). The trivial connection on $\tilde{X} \times \mathbf{C}^n$ descends to give a flat connection on $\mathbb{E}$, whose holonomy is the image of $\rho$.

As we know, the existence of flat connections on $\mathbb{E}$ implies that the first Chern class of $\mathbb{E}$ must vanish. If $c_1(\mathbb{E}) \neq 0$, we can consider projectively flat connections. As we have seen in Section 2.2, these are connections on $\mathbb{E}$ which induce flat connections on the principal $\text{PGL}(n, \mathbf{C})$-bundle associated to $\mathbb{E}$. The holonomy map of a projectively flat connection defines a homomorphism

$$\tilde{\rho} : \pi_1(X, x_0) \rightarrow \text{PGL}(\mathbb{E}_{x_0}),$$

i.e., a projective representation of $\pi_1(X, x_0)$.

Since we are assuming that $X$ is connected we can drop the reference point $x_0 \in X$ from the notation. The fundamental group $\pi_1(X)$ is a finitely generated group generated by $2g$ generators, say $A_1, B_1, \ldots, A_g, B_g$, subject to the single relation

$$\prod_{i=1}^{g}[A_i

bundle $E_{\rho}$ with central curvature associated to $\rho$. Fixing this invariant, we define

(4.4) $\text{Hom}_d(\Gamma, \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})) = \{\rho \in \text{Hom}(\Gamma, \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})) : c_1(E_{\rho}) = d\}$.

The group $\text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$ acts on $\text{Hom}(\Gamma, \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C}))$ by conjugation, that is,

$(g \cdot \rho)(\gamma) = g\rho(\gamma)g^{-1}$ for $g \in \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C}), \rho \in \text{Hom}(\Gamma, \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})), \gamma \in \Gamma,$ preserving $\text{Hom}_d(\Gamma, \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C}))$.

Now, let $\mathbb{E}$ be a $C^\infty$ vector bundle of rank $n$ and degree $d$. Let $\mathcal{D}$ be the set of all connections on $\mathbb{E}$, and let $\mathcal{D}_0$ be the set of connections with constant central curvature, that is,

(4.5) $\mathcal{D}_0 = \{D \in \mathcal{D} : \Theta(D) = \lambda\},$

where $\lambda$ is given by (2.8).

**Proposition 4.1:** There is a homeomorphism

$$\mathcal{D}_0 / \mathcal{G}^c \cong \text{Hom}_d(\Gamma, \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})) / \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C}).$$

Here, the gauge group $\mathcal{G}^c$ acts on $\mathcal{D}$ as usual, by $g \cdot D = gDg^{-1}$ for $g \in \mathcal{G}^c$ and $D \in \mathcal{D}$.

### 4.2. Theorem of Narasimhan–Seshadri Revisited

Let $\mathbb{E}$ be a

We define the moduli space of representations of degree $d$ of $\Gamma$ in $U(n)$ as

$$R(n, d) = \text{Hom}_d(\Gamma, U(n)) / U(n),$$

and the moduli space of irreducible representations of degree $d$ of $\Gamma$ in $U(n)$ as

$$R^*(n, d) = \text{Hom}_d^*(\Gamma, U(n)) / U(n).$$

Combining Proposition 4.2 with Theorem 2.7 we obtain the original formulation of the theorem of Narasimhan and Seshadri [28]:

**Theorem 4.3:** There is a homeomorphism

$$R(n, d) \cong M(n, d),$$

which restricts to a homeomorphism

$$R^*(n, d) \cong M^s(n, d).$$

5. Non-abelian Hodge Theory

5.1. Harmonic Metrics

Our next goal is to show that there is a similar correspondence to that given by Theorem 4.3 between Higgs bundles and representations of $\Gamma$ in $GL(n, C)$. This requires, though, another existence theorem due to Donaldson [14] for $n = 2$ and to Corlette [8] for arbitrary $n$ (and in fact in much more generality).

The set $\text{Hom}(\Gamma, \text{GL}(n, C))$ can be embedded in $\text{GL}(n, C)^{2g+1}$ via the map

(5.1) $$\text{Hom}(\Gamma, \text{GL}(n, C)) \longrightarrow \text{GL}(n, C)^{2g+1}$$

(5.2) $$\rho \mapsto (\rho(A_1), \ldots, \rho(B_g), \rho(J)).$$

We can then give $\text{Hom}(\Gamma, \text{GL}(n, C))$ the subspace topology and consider on

$$\text{Hom}(\Gamma, \text{GL}(n, C)) / \text{GL}(n, C)$$

the quotient topology. In contrast to what happen in the unitary case, this topology is non-Hausd

curvature, where a connection $D$ is called reductive if every $D$-invariant subbundle admits a $D$-invariant complement. Due to the compactness of $U(n)$, every unitary representation is reductive.

Restricting to the sets of reductive and irreducible representations, denoted respectively by $\text{Hom}_d^+(\Gamma, \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C}))$ and $\text{Hom}_d^*(\Gamma, \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C}))$, we obtain the moduli space of reductive representations of degree $d$ of $\Gamma$ in $\text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$,

(5.3) $\mathcal{R}(n, d) = \text{Hom}_d^+(\Gamma, \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})) / \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$,

and the moduli space of irreducible representations of degree $d$ of $\Gamma$ in $\text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$,

(5.4) $\mathcal{R}^*(n, d) = \text{Hom}_d^*(\Gamma, \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})) / \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$,

respectively. In particular, $\text{Hom}_0(\Gamma, \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})) = \text{Hom}(\pi_1(X), \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C}))$ and hence

(5.5) $\mathcal{R}(n, 0) = \text{Hom}^+(\pi_1(X), \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})) / \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$

is the moduli space of reductive representations of the fundamental group of $X$ in $\text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$.

Let $\mathbb{E}$ be a $C^\infty$ vector bundle of rank $n$ and degree $d$ over $X$. We denote the sets of reductive and irreducible connections in $\mathcal{D}_0$ by $\mathcal{D}_0

where ad $\mathbb{E} = \text{End}(\mathbb{E}, h)$ is the bundle of skew-Hermitian endomorphisms of $(\mathbb{E}, h)$, the connection $\nabla$ takes values in ad $\mathbb{E}$, while $\Psi$ takes values in i ad $\mathbb{E}$.

The metric $h$ is said to be harmonic if

(5.7) $$\nabla^*\Psi = 0,$$

where we use the metric on $X$ (in fact the conformal structure is enough here), and the metric on $\mathbb{E}$ to define $\nabla^*$ (see Chap. V, Sec. 2). To explain why the word “harmonic” is used here, recall that a Hermitian metric $h$ on $\mathbb{E}$ is simply a section of the $\text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})/\text{U}(n)$-bundle over $X$ naturally associated to $\mathbb{E}$. This can be viewed as a $\pi_1(X)$-equivariant function

$$\tilde{h} : \tilde{X} \rightarrow \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})/\text{U}(n),$$

where $\tilde{X}$ is the universal cover of $X$. It turns out that $\nabla^*\Psi = 0$ is equivalent to the condition that the map $\tilde{h}$ be harmonic, in the sense that it minimizes the energy $\mathcal{E}(\tilde{h}) = \int_{\tilde{X}} |d\tilde{h}|^2$. In fact the one-form $\Psi$ can be identified with the differential of $\tilde{h}$, and $\nabla$ with the pull-back of the Levi–Civita connection on $\text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})/\text{U}(n)$ ([14, 8]).

The theorem proved by Donaldson [14] in rank 2 and by Corlette [8] in general is the following.

**Theorem 5.2:** Let $D$ be a connection on $\mathbb{E}$ with constant central curvature. Then $(\mathbb{E}, D)$ admits a harmonic metric if and only if $D$ is reductive.

**Remark

Let $Y = \mathcal{A} \times \mathcal{E}^1(X, \text{ad } \mathbb{E})$ and let

$$Y_0 = \{(\nabla, \Psi) \in Y = \mathcal{A} \times \mathcal{E}^1(X, \text{ad } \mathbb{E}) \text{ satisfying (5.8)}\}.$$

The gauge group $\mathcal{G}$ acts on $Y_0$, and $Y_0/\mathcal{G}$ is the moduli space of solutions to (5.8). Theorem 5.2 can now be restated as follows.

**Theorem 5.3:** There is a homeomorphism between the moduli spaces of solutions to (5.8) and the moduli space of reductive connections with constant central curvature on $\mathbb{E}$, i.e.,

$$Y_0/\mathcal{G} \cong \mathcal{D}_0^+/\mathcal{G}^c.$$

This restricts to a homeomorphism between the corresponding moduli spaces of irreducible objects.

### 5.2. Representations and Higgs Bundles

Consider now the correspondence

$$\mathcal{E}^{1,0}(X, \text{End } \mathbb{E}) \longrightarrow \mathcal{E}^1(X, \text{ad } \mathbb{E})$$

$$\Phi \mapsto \Psi = \Phi + \Phi^*.$$

We have the following.

**Proposition 5.4:** The pair $(\nabla, \Psi)$ satisfies (5.8) if and only if $(\nabla, \Phi)$ satisfies Hitchin equations (3.9), where $\Psi = \Phi + \Phi^*$. Moreover, there is a homeomorphism between the moduli spaces of solutions

$$Y_0/\mathcal{G} \cong \mathcal{X}_0/\mathcal{G},$$

which restricts to a homeomorphism between the moduli spaces of irreducible solutions.

Combining previous results in this section with results in Section 2, we obtain the following.

**Theorem 5.5:** There is a homeomorphism

$$\mathcal{R}(n, d) \cong \mathcal

equivalently the space of closed one-forms modulo exact one-forms. Since $X$ is Kähler, the Hodge theorem (Chap. V) gives a decomposition

$$H^1(X, \mathbf{C}) = H^1(X, \mathcal{O}_X) \oplus H^0(X, K).$$

In other words, a cohomology class can be thought of as a pair $(e, \Phi)$ with $e \in H^1(X, \mathcal{O}_X)$ and $\Phi$ a holomorphic one-form. The correspondence between Higgs bundles and representations of $\pi_1(X)$ in $\text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$ is analogous. If $\pi_1(X)$ acts trivially on $\text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$, then the non-abelian cohomology set $H^1(\pi_1(X), \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C}))$ is the set of representations $\pi_1(X) \rightarrow \text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$ modulo conjugation. Equivalently, it is the set of isomorphism classes of $C^\infty$ vector bundles of rank $n$ with flat connections. What we have described is a correspondence between the set of reductive representations and the set of polystable pairs $(E, \Phi)$ where $E$ is a holomorphic vector bundle, i.e. an element in the non-abelian cohomology set $H^1(X, \text{GL}(n, \mathcal{O}_X))$, and $\Phi$ is an endomorphism valued one-form.

6. Representations in $\text{U}(p, q)$ and Higgs Bundles

6.1. Representations in $\text{U}(p, q)$ and Harmonic Metrics

Let $X$ be a compact Riemann surface. We have seen how stable vector bundles correspond to irreducible representations of $\pi_1(X)$ in $\text{U}(n)$, and stable Higgs bundles correspond to irreducible representations of $\pi_1(X)$ in $\text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$. The group $\text{U}(n)$ is the

frames associated to $\mathbb{E}$ to a $\mathrm{U}(p, q)$-bundle and considering connections on $P$. A vector bundle $\mathbb{E}$ equipped with a $\mathrm{U}(p, q)$-structure $H$ has a finer topological invariant than its degree $d$. To show this, we first observe that $\mathrm{U}(p) \times \mathrm{U}(q) \subset \mathrm{U}(p, q)$ is the maximal compact subgroup of $\mathrm{U}(p, q)$. Now, since the symmetric space $\mathrm{U}(p, q) / \mathrm{U}(p) \times \mathrm{U}(q)$ is simply connected, there is no obstruction to further reduce the structure group of $P$ to the group $\mathrm{U}(p) \times \mathrm{U}(q)$. This is equivalent to saying that $\mathbb{E} \cong \mathbb{V} \oplus \mathbb{W}$, where $\mathbb{V}$ and $\mathbb{W}$ are vector bundles with rank $\mathbb{V} = p$ and rank $\mathbb{W} = q$, naturally equipped with Hermitian metrics $h_{\mathbb{V}}$ and $h_{\mathbb{W}}$, respectively. The topological invariant naturally associated to $(\mathbb{E}, H)$ is the pair of integers $(a, b)$, where $a = \deg \mathbb{V}$ and $b = \deg \mathbb{W}$, which does not depend on the reduction to $\mathrm{U}(p) \times \mathrm{U}(q)$. Notice that $d = a + b$.

Let $\rho \in \mathrm{Hom}(\Gamma, \mathrm{U}(p, q))$ be a representation of $\Gamma$ in $\mathrm{U}(p, q)$. As in the case of $\mathrm{U}(n)$ and $\mathrm{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$, to $\rho$ we can associate a smooth vector bundle $E_{\rho}$ equipped with a $\mathrm{U}(p, q)$ structure and a $\mathrm{U}(p, q)$-connection with constant central curvature. We can in this way attach a topological invariant $c(\rho) = (a, b)$ to $\rho$, corresponding to

and

$$\mathcal{R}^*(p, q, a, b) \cong \mathcal{B}_0^* / \mathcal{G}_H.$$

Now Theorem 5.2 can be generalized to $\mathrm{U}(p, q)$ to show that if $D \in \mathcal{B}_0^+$, then there is a harmonic reduction of the $\mathrm{U}(p, q)$ structure to $\mathrm{U}(p) \times \mathrm{U}(q)$. Any reduction defines a decomposition

$$D = \nabla + \Psi,$$

where $\nabla$ is a $\mathrm{U}(p) \times \mathrm{U}(q)$-connection on the reduced $\mathrm{U}(p) \times \mathrm{U}(q)$-bundle and $\Psi$ is a one-form with values in the associated bundle with fibre $\mathfrak{m}$, where

$$\mathfrak{u}(p, q) = \mathfrak{u}(p) \oplus \mathfrak{u}(q) \oplus \mathfrak{m}$$

is the Cartan decomposition of the Lie algebra of $\mathrm{U}(p, q)$, and $\mathfrak{m}$ is the set of matrices

$$\begin{pmatrix} 0 & A \\ -\overline{A}^t & 0 \end{pmatrix},$$

with $A$ a complex matrix with $p$ columns and $q$ rows. The harmonicity condition is, as for $\mathrm{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$,

$$\nabla^* \Psi = 0,$$

where we use now the reduction to $\mathrm{U}(p) \times \mathrm{U}(q)$ to define $\nabla^*$. Similar to the $\mathrm{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$ case, a reduction to $\mathrm{U}(p) \times \mathrm{U}(q)$ can be viewed as a $\pi_1(X)$-equivariant function

$$\tilde{X} \rightarrow \mathrm{U}(p, q) / \mathrm{U}(p) \times \mathrm{U}(q),$$

where $\tilde{X}$ is the universal cover of $X$, and $\nabla

$K)$, and $\gamma \in H^0(\text{Hom}(V, W) \otimes K)$. We say $(E, \Phi)$ is a stable $U(p, q)$-Higgs bundle if the slope stability condition $\mu(E') < \mu(E)$, is satisfied for all $\Phi$-invariant subbundles $E' = V' \oplus W'$, i.e. for all subbundles $V' \subset V$ and $W' \subset W$ such that

$$\beta : W' \longrightarrow V' \otimes K$$

$$\gamma : V' \longrightarrow W' \otimes K.$$

Semistability and polystability are defined as for $\text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$-Higgs bundles. Let $(a, b) \in \mathbb{Z} \times \mathbb{Z}$. We define the moduli space of stable $U(p, q)$-Higgs bundles $\mathcal{M}^s(p, q, a, b)$ as the set of isomorphism classes of stable $U(p, q)$-Higgs bundles with $\deg(V) = a$ and $\deg W = b$. Similarly, we define the moduli space of polystable $U(p, q)$-Higgs bundles $\mathcal{M}(p, q, a, b)$. The basic relation with representations of $\Gamma$ in $U(p, q)$ is given by the following [6].

**Theorem 6.3:** There is a homeomorphism

$$\mathcal{M}(p, q, a, b) \cong \mathcal{R}(p, q, a, b),$$

which restricts to

$$\mathcal{M}^s(p, q, a, b) \cong \mathcal{R}^*(p, q, a, b).$$

The scheme of the proof is very similar to that of Theorem 5.5 for $\text{GL}(n, \mathbf{C})$. A key ingredient is an existence theorem for solutions to the $U(p, q)$-Hitchin equations that we explain now.

Let $(E, \Phi)$ be a $U(p, q)$-Higgs bundle as in (6.2

Given a representation of $\Gamma$ in $U(p, q)$ with topological invariant $c(\rho) = (a, b)$, the Toledo invariant of $\rho$ is defined by

$$\tau(\rho) = \tau(p, q, a, b) = 2 \frac{qa - pb}{p + q}.$$

This invariant satisfies the inequality

$$|\tau(p, q, a, b)| \leq \min\{p, q\}(2g - 2).$$

proved by Domic and Toledo [9] (this is a generalization of the Milnor inequality for the Euler class of a PSL(2, $\mathbb{R}$)-flat connection [24]). This inequality can also be proved for a reductive representation $\rho \in \mathcal{R}(p, q, a, b)$ using the polystability condition of the corresponding Higgs bundle $(E, \Phi) \in \mathcal{M}(p, q, a, b)$ [6].

One of the main results in [6] is the following.

**Theorem 6.5:** The moduli space $\mathcal{M}^s(p, q, a, b)$ (and hence $\mathcal{R}^s(p, q, a, b$)) is a connected smooth Kähler manifold of complex dimension $1 + (p + q)^2(g - 1)$, which is non-empty if and only if $|\tau(p, q, a, b)| \leq \min\{p, q\}(2g - 2).

7. Moment Maps and Geometry of Moduli Spaces

7.1. Symplectic and Kähler Quotients

In this section we review some standard facts about the moment map for the symplectic action of a Lie group $G$ on a symplectic manifold, and the special situation in which the manifold has a Kähler structure which is preserved by the action of the group.

A symplectic manifold is by definition a differentiable manifold $X$ together with a non-degenerate closed 2-form $\Omega$. A Kähler manifold with its Kähler form is an example of a symplectic manifold. A transformation $f$ of $X$ is called symplectic if it leaves invariant the 2-form

Lie algebra $\mathfrak{g}$ of $G$, these functions can be chosen to fit together to give a map to the dual of the Lie algebra,

$$\mu : X \longrightarrow \mathfrak{g}^*$$

defined by

$$\langle \mu(x), a \rangle = \mu_{\bar{a}}(x),$$

where $\tilde{a}$ is the vector field generated by $a \in \mathfrak{g}$, $x \in X$ and $\langle \cdot, \cdot \rangle$ is the natural pairing between $\mathfrak{g}$ and its dual. There is a natural action of $G$ on both sides and a constant ambiguity in the choice of $\mu_v$. If this can be adjusted so that $\mu$ is $G$-equivariant, i.e.

$$\mu(g(x)) = (\text{Ad } g)^*(\mu(x)) \quad \text{for} \quad g \in G \quad x \in X,$$

then $\mu$ is called a moment map for the action of $G$ on $X$. The remaining ambiguity in the choice of $\mu$ is the addition of a constant abelian character in $\mathfrak{g}^*$. If $\mu$ is a moment map then

$$d\mu_{\bar{a}}(x)(v) = \Omega(\tilde{a}(x), v) \quad \text{for} \quad a \in \mathfrak{g}, \quad v \in TX_x, \quad x \in X.$$

An important feature of the moment map is that it gives a way of constructing new symplectic manifolds. More precisely, suppose that $G$ acts freely and discontinuously on $\mu^{-1}(0)$ (recall that $\mu^{-1}(0)$ is $G$-invariant), then

$$\mu^{-1}(0)/G$$

is a symplectic manifold of dimension $\dim M - 2\dim G$. This is the Marsden–Weinstein symplectic quotient of a symplectic manifold acted on by a group [23]. There is a more general construction by taking $\mu^{-1}$ of a coadjoint orbit. In particular if $\lambda$ is a central element in $\

A very basic example is the following. Let $X = \mathbf{C}^n$ be equipped with its natural Kähler structure and let $\mathbf{U}(1)$ act on $X$ by multiplication. The action of $\mathbf{U}(1)$ preserves the symplectic structure and has a moment map $\mu : \mathbf{C}^n \rightarrow \mathbf{R}$ given by $z \mapsto \sum |z_i|^2$. We can consider $\mu^{-1}(1) = S^{2n-1}$. We then have the symplectic quotient

$$\mu^{-1}(1) / \mathbf{U}(1) = S^{2n-1} / \mathbf{U}(1) \cong \mathbf{P}_{n-1}(\mathbf{C}).$$

Since the action of $\mathbf{U}(1)$ preserves also the complex structure, this construction exhibits $\mathbf{P}_{n-1}(\mathbf{C})$ as a Kähler quotient whose induced Kähler structure is in fact the standard one. Note that $\mu^{-1}(1) / \mathbf{U}(1)$ is hence isomorphic to the “good” quotient $\mathbf{C}^n - \{0\} / \mathbf{C}^*$. This relation turns out to be true in a more general context as we will see below.

When $X$ is a projective algebraic manifold there is a very important relation between the symplectic quotient and the algebraic quotient defined by Mumford’s Geometric Invariant Theory (GIT) [25]. Suppose that $i : X \subset \mathbf{P}_{n-1}(\mathbf{C})$ is a projective algebraic manifold acted on by a reductive algebraic group which we can assume to be the complexification $G^c$ of a compact subgroup $G \subset \mathbf{U}(n)$. Then, following [25], we say that $x \in X$ is semistable if there is a non-constant invariant polynomial $f$ with $f(x) \neq 0$. This is equivalent to saying that if $\tilde{x} \in \mathbf{C}^n$ is any representative of $x$, then the closure of the $G^c$-orbit of $\tilde

7.2. Moduli Spaces as Kähler Quotients

The symplectic and Kähler quotient constructions explained above can also be extended to the context of infinite dimensional manifolds (see [23]). We show now how this can be used to endow our moduli spaces with symplectic and Kähler structures.

Coming back to the setup of Section 2.2, let $(\mathbb{E}, h)$ be a smooth complex Hermitian vector bundle over a compact Riemann surface $X$. The set $\mathcal{A}$ of connections on $(\mathbb{E}, h)$ is an affine space modelled on $\mathcal{E}^1(X, \text{ad } \mathbb{E})$, which is equipped with a symplectic structure defined by

$$\Omega_{\mathcal{A}}(\psi, \eta) = \int_X \text{Tr}(\psi \wedge \eta), \quad \text{for } D \in \mathcal{A} \text{ and } \psi, \eta \in T_D \mathcal{A} = \mathcal{E}^1(\text{ad } \mathbb{E}).$$

This is obviously closed since it is independent of $D \in \mathcal{A}$.

Now, the set $\mathcal{C}$ of holomorphic structures on $\mathbb{E}$ is an affine space modelled on $\mathcal{E}^{0,1}(X, \text{End } \mathbb{E})$, and it has a complex structure $J_{\mathcal{C}}$, induced by the complex structure of the Riemann surface, which is defined by

$$J_{\mathcal{C}}(\alpha) = i\alpha, \quad \text{for } \bar{\partial}_E \in \mathcal{C} \text{ and } \alpha \in T_{\bar{\partial}_E} \mathcal{C} = \mathcal{E}^{0,1}(X, \text{End } \mathbb{E}).$$

The complex structure $J_{\mathcal{C}}$ defines a complex structure $J_{\mathcal{A}}$ on $\mathcal{A}$ via the identification $\mathcal{A} \cong \mathcal{C}$ given by (2.10). The symplectic structure $\Omega_{\mathcal{A}}$ and the complex structure $J_{\

consider $\mu^{-1}(\lambda)$. This coincides with the set defined in (2.9) and hence the Kähler quotient $\mu^{-1}(\lambda)/\mathcal{G}$ is precisely the moduli space of constant central curvature connections on $(\mathbb{E}, h)$, which in this way is shown to have a Kähler structure. In view of this, the correspondence given by Theorem 2.7 is formally an infinite dimensional version of the isomorphism between the symplectic and the algebraic quotients in finite dimensions given by Theorem 7.1. Note that even though $\mathcal{A}$ is infinite dimensional, the quotient obtained has finite dimension, as shown in Section 2.2. It should be mentioned that in order to perform the quotient construction in the infinite dimensional set up, all the spaces and the gauge group have to be naturally completed to have Banach manifold structures (see e.g. [4, 20]).

Similarly, the moduli spaces of Higgs bundles can be endowed with a Kähler structure. To explain this, let us denote $\mathcal{E} = \mathcal{E}^{1,0}(X, \text{End} \mathbb{E})$. The linear space $\mathcal{E}$ has a natural complex structure $J_{\mathcal{E}}$ defined by multiplication by $i$, and a symplectic structure given by

$$\Omega_{\mathcal{E}}(\psi, \eta) = i \int_X \text{Tr}(\psi \wedge \eta^*), \quad \text{for } \Phi \in \mathcal{E} \text{ and } \psi, \eta \in T_{\Phi} \mathcal{E} = \mathcal{E}.$$

We can now consider $\mathcal{X} = \mathcal{A} \times \mathcal{E}$ with the symplectic structure $\Omega_{\mathcal{X}} = \Omega_{\mathcal{A}} + \Omega_{\mathcal{E}}$ and complex structure $J_{\mathcal{X}} = J_{\mathcal{A}} + J_{\mathcal{E}}$. The action of $\mathcal{G}$ on $\mathcal{X}$ preserves $\Omega_{\mathcal{X}}$ and $J_{\mathcal{X}}$ and there is a moment

$\mathcal{G}_{\mathbb{V}} \times \mathcal{G}_{\mathbb{W}} \subset \mathcal{G}$, and hence the moment map is given by projecting onto $(\text{Lie } \mathcal{G}_{\mathbb{V}})^* \oplus (\text{Lie } \mathcal{G}_{\mathbb{W}})^*$ in (7.2). The moment map for the action of $\mathcal{G}_{\mathbb{V}} \times \mathcal{G}_{\mathbb{W}}$ on $\mathcal{Y}$ is thus

$$\mu_{\mathcal{Y}} : \mathcal{Y} \longrightarrow \mathcal{E}^2(X, \text{ad } \mathbb{V}) \oplus \mathcal{E}^2(X, \text{ad } \mathbb{W})$$

$$(D_{\mathbb{V}}, D_{\mathbb{W}}, \beta, \gamma) \longmapsto (\Theta(D_{\mathbb{V}}) + \beta \wedge \beta^* + \gamma^* \wedge \gamma, \Theta(D_{\mathbb{W}}) + \gamma \wedge \gamma^* + \beta^* \wedge \beta).$$

We can then restrict this to obtain a moment map $\mu$ on the $(\mathcal{G}_{\mathbb{V}} \times \mathcal{G}_{\mathbb{W}})$-invariant Kähler submanifold $\mathcal{N}_{\mathcal{Y}} = \mathcal{N} \cap \mathcal{Y}$, where $\mathcal{N}$ is given by (7.2). The quotient $\mu^{-1}(\lambda)/\mathcal{G}_{\mathbb{V}} \times \mathcal{G}_{\mathbb{W}}$ is the moduli space of solutions to the $U(p, q)$-Hitchin equations, which is isomorphic to the moduli space of $U(p, q)$-Higgs bundles $\mathcal{M}(p, q, a, b)$ where $a$ and $b$ are the Chern classes of $\mathbb{V}$ and $\mathbb{W}$ respectively.

7.3. Hyperkähler Quotients and Moduli Spaces

A hyperkähler manifold is a differentiable manifold $X$ equipped

where $\alpha^*$ and $\psi^*$ is defined using the Hermitian metric $h$ on $\mathbb{E}$. Clearly, $J_i, i = 1, 2, 3$ satisfy the quaternion relations, and define a hyperkähler structure on $\mathcal{X}$, with symplectic structures $\Omega_i, i = 1, 2, 3$, where $\Omega_1 = \Omega_{\mathcal{X}}$. The action of the gauge group $\mathcal{G}$ on $\mathcal{X}$ preserves the hyperkähler structure and there are moment maps given by

$$\mu_1(D, \Phi) = \Theta(D) + [\Phi, \Phi^*], \quad \mu_2(D, \Phi) = \text{Re}(\bar{\partial}_E \Phi), \quad \mu_3(D, \Phi) = \text{Im}(\bar{\partial}_E \Phi).$$

Taking $\lambda = (\lambda, 0, 0)$, where $\lambda$ is given by (2.8) we have that $\mu^{-1}(\lambda)/\mathcal{G}$ is the moduli space of solutions to Hitchin equations (3.9). In particular, if we consider the irreducible solutions $\mu_*^{-1}(\lambda)$ we have that

$$\mu_*^{-1}(\lambda)/\mathcal{G}$$

is a hyperkähler manifold which, by Theorem 3.5, is isomorphic to the moduli space $\mathcal{M}^s(n, d)$ of stable Higgs bundles of rank $n$ and $d$.

Let us now see how the moduli of harmonic flat connections on $(\mathbb{E}, h)$ can be realized as a hyperKähler quotient. As in Section 4.1, let $\mathcal{D}$ be the set of all complex connections on $\mathbb{E}$. This is an affine space modelled on $\mathcal{E}^1(X, \text{End } \mathbb{E}) = \mathcal{E}^0(X, T^*X \otimes_{\mathbf{R}} \text{End } \mathbb{E})$. The space $\mathcal{D}$ has a complex structure $I_1 =

Now, Theorems 3.5 and 5.2 can be regarded as existence theorems, establishing the non-emptiness of the hyperkähler quotient, obtained by focusing on different complex structures. For Theorem 3.5 one gives a special status to the complex structure $J_1$. Combining the symplectic forms determined by $J_2$ and $J_3$ one has the $J_1$-holomorphic symplectic form $\Omega_c = \Omega_2 + i\Omega_3$ on $\mathcal{A} \times \mathcal{E}$. The complex gauge group $\mathcal{G}^c$ acts on $\mathcal{A} \times \mathcal{E}$ preserving $\Omega_c$. The symplectic quotient construction can also be extended to the holomorphic situation (see e.g. [20]) to obtain the holomorphic symplectic quotient $\{(\bar{\partial}_E, \Phi) : \bar{\partial}_E \Phi = 0\}/\mathcal{G}^c$. What Theorem 3.5 says is that for a class $[(\bar{\partial}_E, \Phi)]$ in this quotient to have a representative (unique up to unitary gauge) satisfying $\mu_1 = \lambda$ it is necessary and sufficient that the pair $(\bar{\partial}_E, \Phi)$ be polystable. This identifies the hyperkähler quotient to the set of equivalence classes of polystable pairs on $\mathbb{E}$. If one now takes $J_2$ on $\mathcal{A} \times \mathcal{E}$ or equivalently $\mathcal{D}$ with $I_1$ and argues in a similar way, one gets Theorem 5.2 identifying the hyperkähler quotient to the set of equivalence classes of reductive central curvature connections on $\mathbb{E}$.

Note that for $n = 1$, the moduli space with complex structure defined by $J_1$ is $T^* \text{Pic}^d(X)$ and with complex structure defined by $J_2$ is $(\mathbf{C}^*)^g$.

8. Higher Dimensional Generalizations

8.1. Hermitian–Einstein Connections and Stable Bundles

M

Semistability and polystability are defined as in the one-dimensional case. Note that, in contrast to the Riemann surface case, in higher dimensions the stability condition depends on the Kähler metric of $X$.

We will see now how stability on a Kähler manifold is also related to the existence of a special Hermitian metric on $E$. Let $h$ be a Hermitian metric on $E$ with canonical connection and curvature $D$ and $\Theta(D)$, respectively. The metric $h$ is called Hermitian-Einstein if

$$\Theta(D) \wedge \Omega^{n-1} = -i\mu I_E \Omega^n,$$

where, after the normalization $\text{Vol} X = 2\pi$, $\mu = \mu(E)$. When $n = 1$, (8.1) reduces to the constant central curvature condition given by (2.1). The following generalizes to higher dimensions the theorem of Narasimhan and Seshadri.

**Theorem 8.1:** Let $E$ be a holomorphic vector bundle over a compact Kähler manifold $(X, \Omega)$. Then $E$ has a Hermitian–Einstein metric if and only if it is polystable.

The polystability of a vector bundle admitting a Hermitian–Einstein metric was proved by Lübke [22] (see also [20]). The existence of a Hermitian–Einstein metric on a stable vector bundle was first proved by Donaldson for algebraic surfaces [12] and then by Uhlenbeck and Yau [38] for arbitrary Kähler manifolds. In [13] Donaldson gave another proof for algebraic manifolds of any dimension.

Theorem 8.1, can also be viewed as a correspondence between moduli spaces. To see this, let $(\mathbb{E}, h)$ be a smooth Hermitian vector bundle over $X$. A connection $D$ on $(\mathbb{E}, h)$ is called Hermitian–Einstein if it satisfies

$$D''^2 = 0$$
$$\Theta(D) \wedge \Omega^{n-1} = -i\mu(\mathbb{E}) I_E \Om

moduli space of instantons, Donaldson defined topological invariants for four-manifolds. One of the main applications of the correspondence given by Theorem 8.2 has been in the computation of the Donaldson invariants for Kähler surfaces (see [11]).

8.2. Higgs Bundles and Representations of Kähler Groups

As above, let $(X, \Omega)$ be a compact Kähler manifold of dimension $n$, whose volume is normalized such that $\text{Vol } X = 2\pi$. A Higgs bundle over $X$ is a pair $(E, \Phi)$ consisting of a holomorphic vector bundle $E$ over $X$ and a Higgs field $\Phi \in H^0(X, \text{End } E \otimes \Omega^1)$, satisfying $\Phi \wedge \Phi = 0$, where $\Omega^1$ is the bundle of holomorphic one-forms on $X$. Note that on a Riemann surface $\Omega^1$ coincides with the canonical line bundle, and the condition $\Phi \wedge \Phi = 0$ is trivialy satisfied for dimensional reasons.

A Higgs bundle $(E, \Phi)$ is said to be stable if and only if $\mu(E') < \mu(E)$ for every coherent subsheaf $E' \subset E$ invariant under $\Phi$, i.e. $\Phi(E') \subset E' \otimes \Omega^1$. Semistability and polystability are defined as usual. As in the one-dimensional case, the notion of stability is related to the existence of a special Hermitian metric on $E$. More precisely, one has the following theorem proved by Simpson [34, 35].

Theorem 8.3: Let $(E, \Phi)$ be a Higgs bundle over $X$. The existence of a Hermitian metric $h$ on $E$ satisfying

$$\left( \Theta(\nabla) + [\Phi, \Phi^*] \right) \wedge \Omega^{n-1} = -i\mu(E)I_E\Omega^n,$$

is equivalent to the polystability of $(E, \Phi

in the sense of Sec. 5. But Theorem 5.2 holds also in higher dimensions (see [8]) and hence we have the following.

Theorem 8.4: Let $D$ be a flat connection on $\mathbb{E}$. Then $\mathbb{E}$ admits a harmonic metric if and only if $D$ is reductive.

The construction of a polystable Higgs bundle from a flat reductive connection follows along the same lines as the one dimensional case explained in Sec. 5 (see also [35]), establishing the following.

Theorem 8.5: There is a one-to-one correspondence between the moduli space of polystable Higgs bundles $(E, \Phi)$ with rank $E = r$ and $E$ satisfying (8.4), and the moduli space of reductive representations of $\pi_1(X)$ in $\text{GL}(r, \mathbf{C})$.

Higgs bundles can also be regarded from the point of view of Tannakian categories. This is a point of view taken by Simpson in [35], which we follow (see also [15] and the references given there for details on Tannakian categories). A tensor category is a category $\mathcal{C}$ with a functorial binary operation $\otimes : \mathcal{C} \times \mathcal{C} \rightarrow \mathcal{C}$. An associative and commutative tensor category is a tensor category provided with additional natural isomorphisms expressing associativity and commutativity of the tensor product that have to satisfy certain canonical axioms. A unit 1 is an object 1 provided with natural isomorphisms $1 \otimes V \cong V$ satisfying canonical axioms. A functor $\mathcal{F}$ between associative and commutative categories with unit is a functor provided with natural isomorphisms $\mathcal{F}(U \otimes V) \cong \mathcal{F}(U) \otimes \mathcal{F}(V)$. A neutral Tannakian category $\mathcal{C}$ is an associative and commutative tensor category with unit, which is abelian, rigid (duals exist), $\text{End}(1) = \mathbf{C}$, and which is provided with an exact, faithful fibre functor $\mathcal{

$\mathcal{F}(\psi)f_V = f_W\mathcal{F}(\psi)$. Let $\text{Aut}^{\otimes}(\mathcal{F})$ be the set of elements $\{f_V\}$ of $\text{End}(\mathcal{F})$ satisfying

$$f_1 = 1 \quad f_{V \otimes W} = f_V \otimes f_W.$$

The existence of duals in $\mathcal{C}$ implies that any element in $\text{Aut}^{\otimes}(\mathcal{F})$ consists entirely of automorphisms, and hence there is no need to include a condition for invertibility. The algebra $\text{End}(\mathcal{F})$ is a projective limit of finite dimensional algebras and it is endowed with a projective limit topology. The subset $\text{Aut}^{\otimes}(\mathcal{F})$ has a structure of projective limit of algebraic varieties.

We come now to the Tannakian nature of Higgs bundles. Let $(E, \Phi)$ and $(F, \Psi)$ be two Higgs bundles. Its tensor product is given by the Higgs bundle $(E \otimes F, \Phi \otimes I_F + I_E \otimes \Psi)$. One has the following (see [35, 15]).

**Proposition 8.7:** The tensor category of polystable Higgs bundles $(E, \Phi)$ over $X$, satisfying (8.4) with fibre functor defined by sending a Higgs bundle to the fibre of the bundle at a fixed point of $X$, is a neutral Tannakian category.

The category of reductive complex representations of the fundamental group of $X$ (with the obvious fibre functor) is also a neutral Tannakian category. It follows from the Tannaka duality theorem that the Tannaka group of this category is the pro-reductive completion of $\pi_1(X)$ (see [35]). This is a group $G$, that comes equipped with a homomorphism $\pi_1(X) \rightarrow G$ such that for every reductive group $H$ and a homomorphism $\pi_1(X) \rightarrow H$ there exists a unique extension $G \rightarrow H$ such that the following diagram

$$\pi_

One can formalise the action of $C^*$ on a Tannakian category $(\mathcal{C}, \mathcal{F})$ in terms of certain tensor functors satisfying canonical axioms. If the action preserves the fibre functor $\mathcal{F}$ one has an action of $C^*$ on $\text{End}(\mathcal{F})$ by sending the element $\{f_V\}$ of $\text{End}(\mathcal{F})$ to $\{f_V^\lambda\}$ with $f_V^\lambda = f_{\lambda V}$ for every $\lambda \in C^*$, and hence one has an action on the Tannaka group $\text{Aut}^{\otimes}(\mathcal{F})$. The action of $C^*$ on the category of polystable Higgs bundles preserves clearly the fibre functor since the bundle is unchanged, and one can then transfer this action to $G$ — the pro-reductive completion of the fundamental group. More precisely one has the following theorem proved by Simpson in [35].

**Theorem 8.8:** There exists a unique action of $C^*$ on $G$, each $\lambda \in C^*$ acting by a homomorphism of pro-reductive groups, such that if $\rho : G \rightarrow \text{GL}(r, \mathcal{C})$ is the representation corresponding to $(E, \Phi)$, then $\rho \circ \lambda$ is the representation corresponding to $(E, \lambda \Phi)$.

In some sense the action of $C^*$ on $G$ is the essence of non-abelian Hodge theory, replacing the $C^*$-action on cohomology explained in Chap. V for the abelian theory.

**References**

[1] Arbarello, Cornalba, Griffiths, Harris, Springer, *Geometry of Algebraic Curves* Vol. I, Springer-Verlag, New York 1985.

[2] M.F. Atiyah, Vector bundles over an elliptic curve, *Proc. London Math. Soc.* 7 (1957), 414–452.

[3] M.F. Atiyah, The moment map in symplectic geometry. *Durham Symposium on Global Riem

[11] S.K. Donaldson and P.B. Kronheimer, *The Geometry of Four Manifolds*, Oxford Mathematical Monographs, Oxford University Press, 1990.

[12] S.K. Donaldson, Anti-self-dual Yang–Mills connections on a complex algebraic surface and stable vector bundles, *Proc. Lond. Math. Soc.* 3 (1985), 1–26.

[13] S.K. Donaldson, Infinite determinants, stable bundles and curvature, Duke Math. J. 54 (1987), 231–247.

[14] S.K. Donaldson, Twisted harmonic maps and the self-duality equations, *Proc. London Math. Soc.* (3) 55 (1987), 127–131.

[15] O. García-Prada, and S. Ramanan, Twisted Higgs bundles and the fundamental group of compact Kähler manifolds, *Mathematical Research Letters* 7 (2000), 517–535.

[16] A. Grothendieck, Sur la classification des fibrés holomorphes sur la sphère de Riemann, *Amer. J. Math.* 79 (1957), 121–138.

[17] N.J. Hitchin, The self-duality equations on a Riemann surface, *Proc. Lond. Math. Soc.* 55 (1987), 59–126.

[18] N.J. Hitchin, A. Karlhede, U. Lindström, and M. Roçek, Hyperkähler metrics and supersymmetry, *Comm. Math. Phys.* 108 (1987), 535–589.

[19] J.-L. Koszul, B. Malgrange, Sur certaines structures fibrés complexes, *Arch. Math.* 9 (1958), 102–109.

[20] S. Kobayashi, *Differential Geometry of Complex Vector Bundles*, Princeton University Press,

[32] B. Riemann, Theorie der Abel’schen Funktionen, *J. Reine angew. Math.* **54** (1857), 115–155.

[33] C.S. Seshadri, Theory of moduli, *Proc. Symp. Pure Math.*, Algebraic Geometry, Amer. Math. Soc., 1975.

[34] C.T. Simpson, Constructing variations of Hodge structure using Yang–Mills theory and applications to uniformization, *J. Amer. Math. Soc.* **1** (1988), 867–918.

[35] C.T. Simpson, Higgs bundles and local systems, *Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math.* **75**, 5–95 (1992).

[36] F. Takemoto, Stable vector bundles on algebraic surfaces, *Nagoya Math. J.* **47** (1973), 29–48; II, ibid. **52** (1973), 173–195.

[37] K.K. Uhlenbeck, Connections with $L^p$ bounds on curvature, *Comm. Math. Phys.* **83** (1982), 31-42.

[38] K.K. Uhlenbeck and S.T. Yau, On the existence of Hermitian-Yang-Mills connections in stable vector bundles *Comm. Pure. Appl. Math.* **39** (1986), 5257–5293<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>

REFERENCES

Michael F. Atiyah
1. *K-Theory*, W. A. Benjamin, Inc., Reading, Mass., 1967.

M. F. Atiyah and R. Bott
1. “A Lefschetz fixed point formula for elliptic complexes, I, II,” *Ann. of Math.*, 86 (1967), 347–407; 88 (1968), 451–491.

M. F. Atiyah and F. Hirzebruch
1. “Vector bundles and homogeneous spaces,” in *Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics*, Vol. III, American Mathematical Society, Providence, 1961.
2. “The Riemann-Roch theorem for analytic embeddings,” *Topology*, 1 (1962), 151–166.

M. F. Atiyah and I. Singer
1. “The index of elliptic operators on compact manifolds,” *Bull. Amer. Math. Soc.*, 69 (1963), 422–433.
2. “The index of elliptic operators: I,” *Ann. of Math.*, 87 (1968), 484–530.

Stefan Bergman
1. *The Kernel Function and Conformal Mapping*, American Mathematical Society, Providence, 1968 (Mathematical Surveys, No. 5, 2nd ed.).

Bruno Bigolin
1. “Gruppi di Aeppeli,” *Ann. Scuola Norm. Sup. Pisa*, 23 (3) (1969), 259–287.

R. L. Bishop and R. J. Crittenden
1. *Geometry of Manifolds*, Academic Press, Inc., New York, 1964.

A. Borel and F. Hirzebruch
1. “Characteristic classes and homogeneous spaces, I, II,” *Am. J. Math.*, 80 (1958), 458–538; 81 (1959), 3

Raoul Bott and S. S. Chern
1. “Hermitian vector bundles and the equidistribution of the zeroes of their holomorphic sections,” *Acta Math.*, 114 (1965), 71–112.

Glen E. Bredon
1. *Sheaf Theory*, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1967.

H. Cartan
1. “Quotients of analytic spaces,” in *Contributions to Function Theory*, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Bombay, 1960.

S. S. Chern
1. “Characteristic classes of Hermitian manifolds,” *Ann. of Math.*, 47 (1946), 85–121.
2. *Complex Manifolds Without Potential Theory*, Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, New York, 1967.
3. “On a generalization of Kähler geometry,” *Algebraic Geometry and Topology—A Symposium in Honor of S. Lefschetz*, Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N. J. (1957), 103–121.

C. Chevalley
1. *Theory of Lie Groups*, I. Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1946.

Fabio Conforto
1. *Abelsche Funktionen and Algebraische Geometrie*, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1956.

Georges de Rham
1. *Variétés Differentiables*, Hermann & Cie, Paris, 1955.

P. Dolbeault
1. “Sur la cohomologie des variétés analytiques complexes,” *C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris*, 236 (1953), 175–177.

L. P. Eisenhart
1. *Differential Geometry*, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1947.

A. Fröhlicher
1. “Relations between the cohomology groups of Dolbeault and topological invariants,” *Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.*,

2. “Verschwindungssätze für analytische Kohomologiegruppen auf Komplexen Räumen,” Invent. Math., 11 (1970), 263–292.

Marvin Greenberg
1. Lectures on Algebraic Topology, W. A. Benjamin, Inc., Reading, Mass., 1967.

Phillip A. Griffiths
1. “Periods of integrals on algebraic manifolds, I, II,” Amer. J. Math., 90 (1968), 568–626; 805–865.
2. “Hermitian differential geometry, Chern classes, and positive vector bundles,” in Global Analysis, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1969.
3. “Periods of integrals on algebraic manifolds: summary of main results and discussion of open problems,” Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 76 (1970), 228–296.
4. “Some results on algebraic cycles on algebraic manifolds,” Bombay Colloquium, 1968, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Bombay, 1969, 93–191.
5. “On the periods of certain rational integrals, I, II,” Ann. of Math., 90 (1969), 460–495; 498–541.
6. “Periods of integrals of algebraic manifolds, III (some global differential-geometric properties of the period mapping),” Publ. Math. I.H.E.S., 38 (1970), 125–180.

Phillip A. Griffiths and Wilfried Schmid
1. “Locally homogeneous complex manifolds,” Acta. Math., 123 (1970), 253–302.

A. Grothendieck
1. “Standard conjectures on algebraic cycles,” Algebraic Geometry, Bombay Colloquium, 1968, Oxford University Press, 1969.

R. C. Gunning
1. Lectures on

W. V. D. Hodge
1. *The Theory and Application of Harmonic Integrals*, Cambridge University Press, New York, 1941 (2nd ed., 1952).
2. “The topological invariants of algebraic varieties,” in *Proceedings International Congress of Mathematicians*, 1950, Vol. I, American Mathematical Society, Providence, 1952, 182–191.

Lars Hörmander
1. *Linear Partial Differential Operators*, Springer-Verlag New York Inc., New York, and Academic Press, Inc., New York, 1963.
2. *An Introduction to Complex Analysis in Several Variables*, Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, New York, 1966.
3. “Pseudo-differential operators,” *Comm. Pure Appl. Math.*, 18 (1965), 501–517.
4. “Pseudodifferential operators and hypoelliptic equations,” in *Singular Integrals*, Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics, Vol. X, American Mathematical Society, Providence, 1967, 138–183.

Shoshichi Kobayashi and Katsumi Nomizu
1. *Foundations of Differential Geometry*, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (Interscience Division), New York, Vol. I, 1963; Vol. II, 1969.

K. Kodaira
1. “On a differential-geometric method in the theory of analytic stacks,” *Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.*, 39 (1953), 1268–1273.
2. “On Kähler varieties of restricted type (an intrinsic characterization of algebraic varieties),” *Ann. of Math.*, 60 (1954), 28–48.
3. “On compact complex analytic surfaces, I,” *Ann. of Math.*, 71 (1960), 111–152.
4. “Complex structures on $S^1 \times S^3$,” *Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci

S. MacLane
1. *Homology Theory*, Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., New York, 1967 (2nd ed.).

John Milnor
1. *Morse Theory*, Annals of Mathematics Studies, No. 51, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N. J., 1963.
2. *Lectures on Differential Topology*, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J., 1958.

C. B. Morrey, Jr.
1. “The analytic embedding of abstract real-analytic manifolds,” *Ann. of Math.*, 68 (1958), 159–201.

J. Morrow and K. Kodaira
1. *Complex Manifolds*, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc. New York, 1971.

S. Nakano
1. “On complex analytic vector bundles,” *J. Math. Soc. Japan*, 7 (1955), 1–12.

R. Narasimhan
1. *Analysis on Real and Complex Manifolds*, North-Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1968.
2. *Introduction to the Theory of Analytic Spaces*, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 25, Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., New York, 1966.

A. Newlander and L. Nirenberg
1. “Complex analytic coordinates in almost complex manifolds,” *Ann. of Math.*, 65 (1957), 391–404.

L. Nirenberg
1. “Pseudo-differential operators,” in *Global Analysis*, Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics, Vol. 16, American Mathematical Society, Providence, pp. 149–167.

K. Nomizu
1. *Lie Groups and Differential Geometry*, Mathematical Society of Japan, Tokyo, 1956.

R. Palais
1. *Seminar on the Atiyah-Singer Index Theorem*, Annals of Mathematics Studies, No. 57, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1965

W. Rudin
1. Functional Analysis, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1973.

I. R. Šafarevič
1. Algebraic Surfaces, American Mathematical Society, Providence, 1967 (English translation of Russian ed.: Proceedings of Steklov Inst. of Mathematics, No. 75, Moscow, 1965).

Wilfried Schmid
1. Homogeneous Complex Manifolds and Representations of Semisimple Lie Groups, Ph.D. Thesis, University of California, Berkeley, 1967.

L. Schwartz
1. Theorie des Distributions (2nd edition), Hermann, Paris, (1966).

R. T. Seeley
1. “Integro-differential operators on vector bundles,” Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 117 (1965), 167–204.

J. P. Serre
1. “Un théorème de dualité,” Comment. Math. Helv., 29 (1955), 9–26.
2. “Géométrie algébraique et géométrie analytique,” Ann. Inst. Fourier, 6 (1956), 1–42.
3. Algèbres de Lie semi-simples complexes, W. A. Benjamin, Inc., Reading, Mass., 1966.

C. L. Siegel
1. Analytic Functions of Several Complex Variables, Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, N. J., 1948 (reprinted with corrections, 1962).

Michael Spivak
1. Calculus on Manifolds, W. A. Benjamin, Inc., Reading, Mass., 1965.

N. Steenrod
1. The Topology of Fibre Bundles, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N. J., 1951.

Shlomo Sternberg
1. Lectures on Differential Geometry, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N. J., 1965.

V. S. Varadarajan
1. Lie Groups, Lie Algebras, and Their Representations,

R. O. Wells, Jr. and Joseph A. Wolf
1. “Poincaré series and automorphic cohomology on flag domains,” *Ann. of Math.* **105** (1977), 397–448.

Hassler Whitney
1. “Differentiable manifolds,” *Ann. of Math.*, **37** (1936), 645–680.

A. Zygmund
1. *Trigonometric Series*, Cambridge University Press, New York, 1968 (rev. ed.).<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>

A

Atiyah, 27, 145, 148

B

Bergman, 219, 220
Bigolin, 50
Bishop, 1
Borel, 27, 31, 101, 104
Bott, 84, 86, 145, 148, 225
Bredon, 36, 44, 64

C

Cartan, 41, 151, 200, 217, 222
Chern, 65, 84, 86, 96, 181, 191
Chevalley, 171
Chow, 11
Conforto, 221
Crittenden, 1

D

deRham, 1, 10, 141, 155, 164
Dolbeault, 61

E

Eisenhart, 96

F

Fröhlicher, 151, 197, 198

G

Godement, 36, 55, 64
Goldberg, 191
Grauert, 10, 226, 234, 240
Greenberg, 100, 169
Griffiths, 65, 154, 198, 207, 210, 211, 213–216, 226, 240
Grothendieck, 27, 48, 195
Gunning, 2, 10–11, 36, 41, 44, 49, 58, 64, 107, 151, 217, 222, 234, 240

H

Hartshorne, 226
Hecht, 183, 185, 187
Helgason, 31

M

MacLane, 48, 55
Milnor, 27
Morrey, 10
Morrow, 213, 214

N

Nagy, 138
Nakano, 226, 228
Narasimhan, 1, 107
Newlander, 1, 35
Nirenberg, 1, 35, 135
Nomizu, 31, 35, 65–66, 71

O

Oka, 41

P

Palais, 114, 119, 135, 138
Peetre, 125

R

Riemann, 207, 209, 212
Riemenschneider, 226, 240
Riesz, 138
Rossi, 2, 10–11, 36, 41, 44, 49, 58, 64, 107, 151, 217, 222, 234, 240

S

Safarevic, 198
Schmid, 216
Schwartz, 121
Seeley, 135
Serre, 27, 31, 151, 153, 170, 181, 217, 222, 240
Siegel, 222, 234
Singer, 27
Spencer, 212, 213, 214
Spivak, 1, 47
Steenrod, 26, 31
Sternberg, 10, 71

V

Varadarajan, 170, 186

W

Weil, 84, 86, 155, 181, 183, 187, 197, 208, 218–22

SUBJECT INDEX

A

abelian varieties, $234^1$
abstract deRham theorem, 58
acyclic resolution, 58
adjoint operator (map), 113, 114, 146, 159, 227
algebraic submanifold, 9, 11
almost complex manifolds, 27, 30, 33
almost complex structure, 1, 30, 31–36, 213
analytic sheaf, 39, 41
Arzela-Ascoli theorem, 112, 121
Atiyah-Singer index theorem, 27, 142, 153
atlas, 4
automorphism, 199

B

Banach open mapping theorem, 141
Banach spaces, 138–140
base space, 13, 21, 24, 32, 90, 165
Bergman kernel function, 219
Bergman metric, 219–220
Betti numbers, 150, 151, 198, 201, 202
bianalytic (real analytic isomorphism), 4
Bianchi identity, 75, 90
big period matrix, 221
biholomorphic mapping, 4, 189, 199, 211, 237
Bockstein operator, 58, 102–105
bundle homomorphism, 24–25
bundle isomorphism, 19, 30, 175

bundle mapping, 33, 109, 163
bundle morphism, 25, 99

C

canonical abstract (soft) resolution, 36, 50, 54, 55
canonical bundle, 198, 217, 224, 225, 230
canonical connection, 71–

Chow’s theorem, 217
classification of vector bundles, 12, 98, 101
classifying space, 101, 215
coboundary operator (see also Cech coboundary operator), 48, 103
coherent analytic sheaf, 41, 240
cohomology class, 58, 65, 90, 97, 102, 106, 142, 202, 217
cohomology groups, 50, 55, 58, 145, 196, 203, 205, 222
cohomology ring, 152, 201
cohomology theory, 36, 51, 58
commutation relation, 172, 181, 196
compact complex manifold, 10, 11, 26, 96–97, 142, 150, 151, 153, 154, 163, 170, 197, 198, 200, 201, 211, 217–219, 223
compact complex submanifold, 10, 216
compact complex surfaces, 153
compact differentiable manifolds, 108, 114, 131, 134, 137, 144, 149, 163, 169, 202
compact Kähler manifold, 195, 197, 198, 203, 205–208
compact Lie group, 173, 174
compact linear map (operator; see also continuous map), 111
compact manifold, 84, 96, 123, 131, 136, 137

differential equations, 1
differential forms, 1, 27, 47, 61, 64, 68–70, 74–76, 83, 86, 91, 96, 100, 103, 106, 116, 149, 152, 163, 168, 189, 190, 193, 197, 201–203, 209, 217, 223–227
differential forms:
of degree $p$, 23
of type $(p, q)$, 1, 32, 61, 117
with vector bundle coefficients (see also vector-bundle-valued differentiable $(p, q)$-forms), 68
differential mapping (map), 15, 16, 21, 66
differential operator, 70, 108, 114, 115–120, 125, 135, 142, 144, 198, 227, 228
differential sheaf, 47, 49
dimension of a representation, 171
direct limit, 14, 42–45, 51, 102
directional derivative, 15
divisor, 106, 107, 224, 230, 239
Dolbeault complex, 117, 145, 146
Dolbeault group, 151, 154, 170, 197, 198, 208
Dolbeault’s theorem, 61–63, 151
dual vector bundle, 92, 98, 166
$\bar{\partial}$-operator, 27, 48

E

effective cycles, 206, 207

Hermitian exterior algebra, 170, 182, 183
Hermitian holomorphic vector bundle, 77, 79, 168
Hermitian metric, 67, 68, 76–82, 91, 94, 104, 109, 118, 145, 150, 151, 154, 158, 160, 166, 170, 174, 188, 190, 198, 201, 211, 219, 221, 223, 228, 232
Hermitian vector bundle, 67, 76, 91, 109, 137, 166
Hermitian vector space, 154, 181, 182, 184, 191
Hilbert spaces, 110, 111, 113, 137, 138, 143
Hirzebruch-Riemann-Roch theorem, 153
Hodge decomposition (theorem), 108, 154, 197, 198, 201, 203, 204, 208, 210, 225
Hodge filtration, 210, 211, 214
Hodge form, 218, 219, 221, 222, 234
Hodge inner product, 165, 166, 167, 168
Hodge manifold, 217, 218, 219, 234
Hodge metric, 191, 218, 220
Hodge numbers, 150, 151, 154, 198, 206, 208,

L

Laplacian operator, 119, 128, 136, 141, 145, 146, 149–151, 154, 163, 168, 191, 194, 223

Lefschetz decomposition (theorem), 154, 181, 182, 183, 195–197, 201, 202, 203, 210

left invariant differential forms, 174

left invariant vector fields, 174

Leray cover, 64, 104

Lie algebra, 75, 171, 174
  sl (2, C), 154, 170, 171–173, 178, 181
  su (2), 172, 173
  of a Lie group, 171, 173

Lie bracket, 171, 172

Lie group, 171
  SL (2, C), 171–173, 179, 185
  SU (2), 172–174

Lie product, 75, 86

line bundles, 65, 81, 99, 101–102, 106, 223, 224, 231, 239

linear equivalence, 107

linear partial differential operator, 115, 118, 119

local coordinates, 15, 16, 24, 30, 33, 47, 80, 83, 84, 88, 99, 108, 109, 114, 115, 118, 132, 164, 190, 223, 236, 23

projective algebraic manifold, 1, 11, 214, 218, 234
projective algebraic variety, 9
projective hyperplane, 9
projective space, 5, 8, 9, 82, 189, 205, 218, 221
properly discontinuous group, 199, 200, 219
pseudoconvex spaces, 234, 240
pseudodifferential operators, 108, 115, 119, 122, 124, 126, 129, 131, 132–136
pseudoinverse, 136
pullback (vector bundle), 24, 25, 92, 101, 217, 238

Q

quadratic transform, 217, 229, 230
quotient sheaf, 45, 47, 235
quotient topology, 5, 8, 14, 189, 199

R

real-analytic embedding, 9–10
real-analytic fibering (family), 215
real-analytic functions, 2, 3
real-analytic isomorphism (bianalytic), 4
real-analytic manifold, 1, 3, 5, 10
real-analytic mapping, 4
real-analytic structure, 3, 4
real-analytic submanifold, 10
real-analytic vector bundle, 13, 18
real-dimension, 3
real tangent bundle, 27, 95
regularity of homogeneous solutions, 139
Rellich lemma, 108, 111–112
representation,
Lie algebra, 171
infinite-dimensional, 171
sl (2, C), 173–177, 179, 18

signature, 204, 208
singular cochains, 47, 61
singular cohomology, 48, 100, 149
singular points, 9
smoothing operator, 121, 125, 130–131, 136, 137, 140
infinite order (operator of order $-\infty$), 125, 130, 142
Sobolev lemma, 108, 111, 121, 140
Sobolev norm, 109, 131
Sobolev spaces, 108, 121, 137, 145
soft resolutions, 36, 58
soft sheaf, 51, 52, 53–56, 58, 61
spectral sequence, 197, 198
stalk, 42
standard complex structure, 28
star-operator (*-operator, see also Hodge *-operator), 158, 161, 163, 164, 169, 170
Stein manifold, 11, 64
Stokes’ theorem, 50
strictly positive smooth measure, 108, 118, 137, 145
structure sheaf, 38, 39, 101, 238
submanifold, 9
subpresheaf, 37
subsheaf, 37, 39, 46
symbol mappings, 115, 117, 125, 132
symbol of differential operator, 115
symbol sequence, 117, 144
symmetric algebra bundles, 23

T

tangent bundle, 1, 14, 15, 16, 17, 22, 30, 31, 81, 95, 1

Graduate Texts in Mathematics
(continued from page ii)

64 EDWARDS. Fourier Series. Vol. I. 2nd ed.
65 WELLS. Differential Analysis on Complex Manifolds. 3rd ed.
66 WATERHOUSE. Introduction to Affine Group Schemes.
67 SERRE. Local Fields.
68 WEIDMANN. Linear Operators in Hilbert Spaces.
69 LANG. Cyclotomic Fields II.
70 MASSEY. Singular Homology Theory.
71 FARKAS/KRA. Riemann Surfaces. 2nd ed.
72 STILLWELL. Classical Topology and Combinatorial Group Theory. 2nd ed.
73 HUNGERFORD. Algebra.
74 DAVENPORT. Multiplicative Number Theory. 3rd ed.
75 HOCHSCHILD. Basic Theory of Algebraic Groups and Lie Algebras.
76 IITAKA. Algebraic Geometry.
77 HECKE. Lectures on the Theory of Algebraic Numbers.
78 BURRIS/SANKAPPANAVAR. A Course in Universal Algebra.
79 WALTERS. An Introduction to Ergodic Theory.
80 ROBINSON. A Course in the Theory of Groups. 2nd ed.
81 FORSTER. Lectures on Riemann Surfaces.
82 BOTT/TU. Differential Forms in Algebraic Topology.
83 WASHINGTON. Introduction to Cyclotomic Fields. 2nd ed.
84 IRELAND/ROSEN. A Classical Introduction to Modern Number Theory. 2nd ed.
85 EDWARDS. Fourier Series. Vol. II. 2nd ed.
86 VAN LINT. Introduction to Coding Theory. 2nd ed.
87 BROWN. Cohomology of Groups.
88 PIERCE. Associative Algebras.
89 LANG. Introduction to Algebraic and Abelian Functions. 2nd ed.
90 BRØNDSTED. An Introduction to Convex Polytopes.
91 BEARDON. On the Geometry of Discrete Groups.
92 DIESTEL. Sequences and Series in Banach Spaces

121 LANG. Cyclotomic Fields I and II. Combined 2nd ed.
122 REMMERT. Theory of Complex Functions. Readings in Mathematics
123 EBBINGHAUS/HERMES et al. Numbers. Readings in Mathematics
124 DUBROVIN/FOMENKO/NOVIKOV. Modern Geometry—Methods and Applications Part III.
125 BERENSTEIN/GAY. Complex Variables: An Introduction.
126 BOREL. Linear Algebraic Groups. 2nd ed.
127 MASSEY. A Basic Course in Algebraic Topology.
128 RAUCH. Partial Differential Equations.
129 FULTON/HARRIS. Representation Theory: A First Course. Readings in Mathematics
130 DODSON/POSTON. Tensor Geometry.
131 LAM. A First Course in Noncommutative Rings. 2nd ed.
132 BEARDON. Iteration of Rational Functions.
133 HARRIS. Algebraic Geometry: A First Course.
134 ROMAN. Coding and Information Theory.
135 ROMAN. Advanced Linear Algebra. 2nd ed.
136 ADKINS/WEINTRAUB. Algebra: An Approach via Module Theory.
137 AXLER/BOURDON/RAMEY. Harmonic Function Theory. 2nd ed.
138 COHEN. A Course in Computational Algebraic Number Theory.
139 BREDON. Topology and Geometry.
140 AUBIN. Optima and Equilibria. An Introduction to Nonlinear Analysis.
141 BECKER/WEISPFENNING/KREDEL. Gröbner Bases. A Computational Approach to Commutative Algebra.
142 LANG. Real and Functional Analysis. 3rd ed.
143 DOOB. Measure Theory.
144 DENNIS/FARB. Noncommutative Algebra.
145 VICK. Homology Theory. An Introduction to Algebraic Topology. 2nd ed.
146 BRIDGES. Computability: A Mathematical Sketchbook.
147 ROSENBERG. Al

182 WALTER. Ordinary Differential Equations.
183 MEGGINSON. An Introduction to Banach Space Theory.
184 BOLLOBAS. Modern Graph Theory.
185 COX/LITTLE/O’SHEA. Using Algebraic Geometry. 2nd ed.
186 RAMAKRISHNAN/VALENZA. Fourier Analysis on Number Fields.
187 HARRIS/MORRISON. Moduli of Curves.
188 GOLDBLATT. Lectures on the Hyperreals: An Introduction to Nonstandard Analysis.
189 LAM. Lectures on Modules and Rings.
190 ESMONDE/MURTY. Problems in Algebraic Number Theory. 2nd ed.
191 LANG. Fundamentals of Differential Geometry.
192 HIRSCH/LACOMBE. Elements of Functional Analysis.
193 COHEN. Advanced Topics in Computational Number Theory.
194 ENGEL/NAGEL. One-Parameter Semigroups for Linear Evolution Equations.
195 NATHANSON. Elementary Methods in Number Theory.
196 OSBORNE. Basic Homological Algebra.
197 EISENBUD/HARRIS. The Geometry of Schemes.
198 ROBERT. A Course in $p$-adic Analysis.
199 HEDENMALM/KORENBLUM/ZHU. Theory of Bergman Spaces.
200 BAO/CHERN/SHEN. An Introduction to Riemann–Finsler Geometry.
201 HINDRY/SILVERMAN. Diophantine Geometry: An Introduction.
202 LEE. Introduction to Topological Manifolds.
203 SAGAN. The Symmetric Group: Representations, Combinatorial Algorithms, and Symmetric Functions.
204 ESCOFIER. Galois Theory.
205 FÉLIX/HALPERIN/THOMAS. Rational Homotopy Theory. 2nd ed.
206 MURTY. Problems in Analytic Number Theory. Readings in Mathematics
207 GODSIL/ROYLE. Algebraic Graph Theory.
208 CHENEY. Analysis for Applied Mathematics