

CHAPTER 18

On page 72 it is taken for granted that disjoint plane regions $R_k$ of diameter less than $\epsilon$ can always be constructed within the square $X$ so as to separate finitely many pairs of interior points $\{p_k, q_k\}$ provided all of these points are distinct and $|p_k - q_k| < \epsilon$ for each $k$. For a detailed proof of this geometric fact, see [68]. (In general, disjoint finite subsets of the plane can be so separated if and only if the diameter of each is less than $\epsilon \sqrt{3} / 2$ [68].) It follows that if $p_1, \ldots, p_K$ are distinct interior points of $X$, and likewise $q_1, \ldots, q_K$, and $|p_k -

cell of each cycle and leaves the other points $p_j$ fixed, and choose an $S_3 \in M_{2\epsilon}$ that transposes the members of each of the disjoint pairs of points assigned to the edges $e_k$ and leaves the other points $p_j$ fixed. Then $p_1, \ldots, p_{4N}$ constitute a single orbit of $S_3S_2S_1T$. Thus, arbitrarily close to $T$ there is an element of $M$ that belongs to any given one of the sets $E_{ij}$.

CHAPTER 19

For an application of Theorem 19.5 to some other $\sigma$-ideals of sets, see [60].

CHAPTER 20

A Lusin set $E$ not only has Lebesgue measure zero (page 79), it has absolute measure zero; that is, $\mu(E) = 0$ for the completion of each finite nonatomic Borel measure in $R$. (This follows, for example, from Theorem 16.5.) The existence of sets of absolute measure zero having power $n_1$ can be proved without the continuum hypothesis [75].

Propositions 20.4 and 20.4* can both be viewed as corollaries of a single purely set-theoretic theorem of Sierpiński [73]. For a statement of that theorem and another application of it, see [61].

CHAPTER 21

One way to determine the category of the set $E$ defined on page 85, last paragraph, is to observe that in the Banach-Mazur game, played with blocks of binary digits (page 30), a winning strategy in the game $\langle E, E' \rangle$ is for $(B)$ to choose at each move a block of zeros twice as long as the block of digits just chosen by $(A)$. Then apply Theorem 6.1.

The zero-one law (Theorem 21.4) has been generalized in several directions. See, for example, [57], [63], [69], [71], and [83]. An abstract framework within which a number of analogies between measure and category can be unified is described in [64].

sense of Hashimoto [52]. (See [67] for other references.) The topology corresponding to a lower density $\phi$ may be extremally disconnected. (This is the case, for example, when $\phi$ is a lifting [16, page 59].) However, the Lebesgue density topology makes $R$ connected. [Otherwise there exists a measurable set $A \neq \emptyset, R$, having density 1 at each point of $A$ and density 0 at each point of $A'$. Choose a number $a$ that is not an upper bound of $A$ or $A'$ and for $a < x < \infty$ define $f(x) = m([a, x] \cap A)$. Then $f'(x) = \chi_A(x)$ on $(a, \infty)$ and the range of $f'$ is $\{0, 1\}$, contrary to the intermediate-value theorem for derivatives.] For additional properties of the density topology, see [78].<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>

References

1. Banach, S.: Sur les suites d'ensembles excluant l'existence d'une mesure. Colloq. Math. 1, 103—108 (1948).
2. Besicovitch, A. S.: A problem on topological transformation of the plane. Fund. Math. 28, 61—65 (1937).
3. Birkhoff, G. D.: Dynamical systems. Amer. Math. Soc. Colloq. Publ., Vol. 9, New York 1927.
4. Borel, E.: Leçons sur les fonctions de variables réelles. Paris: Gauthier-Villars 1905.
5. — Leçons sur la theorie des fonctions. Paris: Gauthier-Villars 1914.
6. Brouwer, L. E. J.: Lebesguesches Mass und Analysis Situs. Math. Ann. 79, 212—222 (1919).
7. Carathéodory, C.: Über den Wiederkehrsatz von Poincaré. S. B. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. 1919, 580—584.
8. Contributions to the theory of games, Vol. 2. Annals of Math. Studies, no. 28, pp. 245—266. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton Univ. Press 1953.
9. Contributions to the theory of games, Vol. 3. Annals of Math. Studies, no. 39, pp. 159—163. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton Univ. Press 1957.
10. Erdös, P.: Some remarks on set theory. Ann. of Math. (2) 44, 643—646 (1943).
11. Goffman, C., Neugebauer, C. J., Nishiura, T.: Density topology and approximate continuity. Duke Math. J. 28, 497—505 (1961).
12. Halmos, P

23. Oxtoby, J. C.: The category and Borel class of certain subsets of $\mathcal{L}_p$. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 43, 245—248 (1937).

24. — Note on transitive transformations. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S. 23, 443—446 (1937).

25. — Spaces that admit a category measure. J. Reine Angew. Math. 205, 156—170 (1961).

26. — Cartesian products of Baire spaces. Fund. Math. 49, 157—166 (1961).

27. — Ulam, S. M.: On the equivalence of any set of first category to a set of measure zero. Fund. Math. 31, 201—206 (1938).

28. — Measure-preserving homeomorphisms and metrical transitivity. Ann. of Math. (2) 42, 874—920 (1941).

29. Poincaré, H.: Les méthodes nouvelles de la mécanique céleste, Vol. 3. Paris: Gauthier-Villars 1899.

30. Rademacher, H.: Eineindeutige Abbildungen und Meßbarkeit. Monatsh. Math. Phys. 27, 183—291 (1916).

31. Riesz, F., Sz.-Nagy, B.: Leçons d'analyse fonctionnelle, 4th ed. Paris: Gauthier-Villars 1965.

32. Shoenfield, J. R.: Mathematical logic. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley 1967.

33. Sierpinski, W.: Sur une extension de la notion de l'homéomorphie. Fund. Math. 22, 270—275 (1934).

34. — Sur la dualité entre la première catégorie et la mesure nulle. Fund. Math. 22, 276—280

46. Bruckner, A. M.: A category analogue of a theorem on metric density. Israel J. Math. 11, 249—253 (1972).
47. — Leonard, J. L.: Derivatives. Amer. Math. Monthly 73, H. E. Slaught Memorial Papers, No. 11, 24—56 (1966).
48. Dowker, Y. N.: The mean and transitive points of homeomorphisms. Ann. of Math. (2) 58, 123—133 (1953).
49. Erdös, P., Oxtoby, J. C.: Partitions of the plane into sets having positive measure in every non-null measurable product set. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 79, 91—102 (1955).
50. Flachsmeyer, J., Lotz, S.: A survey on hyperdiffuse measures. I. Proceedings of Conference Topology and Measure (Zinnowitz, 1974), Part I, pp. 87—128. Ernst-Moritz-Arndt Univ., Greifswald, 1978.
51. Fleissner; W. G., Kunen, K.: Barely Baire spaces. Fund. Math. 101, 229—240 (1978).
52. Hashimoto, H.: On the *topology and its application. Fund. Math. 101, 5—10 (1976).
53. Humke, P. D.: Baire category and disjoint rectilinear accessibility. J. London Math. Soc. (2) 14, 245—248 (1976).
54. Jech, T. J.: The axiom of choice. Amsterdam-London: North-Holland 1973.
55. Krom, M. R.: Cartesian products of metric Baire spaces. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 42, 588—594 (1974).
56. — Infinite games and special Baire space

72. Sander, W.: A generalization of a theorem of S. Piccard. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 73, 281—282 (1979).

73. Sierpiński, W.: Un théorème de la théorie générale des ensembles et ses applications. C. R. Soc. Sci. Varsovie 28, 131—135 (1936).

74. — Fonctions additives non complètement additives et fonctions non mesurables. Fund. Math. 30, 96—99 (1938).

75. — Szpilrajn (= Marczewski), E.: Remarque sur le problème de la mesure. Fund. Math. 26, 256—261 (1936).

76. Solovay, R. M.: A model of set theory in which every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable. Ann of Math. (2) 92, 1—56 (1970).

77. Sucheston, L.: A note on conservative transformations and the recurrence theorem. Amer. J. Math. 79, 444—447 (1957).

78. Tall, F. D.: The density topology. Pacific J. Math. 62, 275—284 (1976).

79. Telgársky, R.: On some topological games. Proc. Fourth Prague Topological Sympos., Prague 1976, Part B, 461—472.

80. Ulam, S. M.: Sets, numbers, and universes: selected works. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press 1974.

81. — The Scottish book: A LASL Monograph. Los Alamos Scientific Lab. 1977. LA-6832.

82. Walter, W.: A counterexample in connection with Egorov's theorem. Amer. Math. Monthly 84, 118—119 (1977).

83. White, H. E. Jr.: Two unrelated results involving Baire spaces.

Index

Alexandroff's theorem 47
algebraic number 6
algebra (of sets) 14
almost all 11
analytic set 22
automorphism 49

Baire category theorem 2, 41
— space 41
Baire's theorem on functions of first class 32
ball 39
Banach category theorem 62
Banach-Mazur game 27
base for a topology 39
Bernstein set 24
Borel measure 63
— set 15
Borel's theorem 3
Brouwer's transformation of the square 58

Cantor set 4
Cantor's theorem 1
cardinal of measure zero 63
category at point 29
— measure 86
Cauchy sequence 40
closed set 40
closure of a set 40
complete measure space 14
— metric space 40
continuous mapping 40
continuum hypothesis 26
convergent sequence 39
countable 1
— additivity 14
— subadditivity 11
cover 10

degree (of an algebraic number) 6
dense 1, 40
density at a point 16
— topology 90
denumerable 1
dissipative mapping 66
duality principle 75

Egoroff's theorem 37
equivalence (modulo nullsets) 18
ergodic theorem 68
extended principle of duality 82

first category 2, 40
F$_\sigma$ set 14
Fubini's theorem 53
function of first class 32

Gale-Stewart game 30
G$_\delta$ set 14

Hausdorff ($s$-dimensional) measure zero 8
homeomorphism 40

inaccessible cardinal 26
indicator function (= characteristic function) 31
integral metric 42
interior 40
interval (in $r$-space) 10
isometric 43

Kemperman-M

Lusin set 78
Lusin's theorem 37

Marczewski-Sikorski theorems 63, 64
measurable function 36
— mapping 66
— set. 12
measure 14
— space 14
metric space 39
Montgomery's lemma 62

neighborhood 39, 40
nonatomic measure 63
nondissipative mapping 66
non-measurable sets 22
normalized measure 63
nowhere dense 2, 40
— differentiable function 45
nullset (= set of measure zero) 3, 11

open set 39
oscillation 31
outer (Lebesgue) measure 10

phase space 68
Poincaré recurrence theorem 67
product measure 84
— set 52
— topology 84
— transformation 58
property of Baire, for functions 36
— —, for sets 19
pseudo metric space 43

recurrence property 66
recurrent point, under a transformation 67
— with respect to a set 65
regular open set 20
— space 86

remetrization 41, 47
residual set 41
Riemann-integrable function 33
— —, composite 51
ring (of sets) 14

second category 2, 40
section of a set 52
semiorbit 65
separable 39
Sierpinski-Erdős theorem 75
σ-algebra 14, 15
σ-ideal 3
σ-ring 14
singleton 2
space of automorphisms 49, 58, 71
— — continuous functions 42, 45
— — measurable sets 43
— — Riemann-integrable functions 43
strategy 27
symmetric difference 17, 19

tail set 84
topologically complete 41
— equivalent metrics 39

Graduate Texts in Mathematics

Soft and hard cover editions are available for each volume up to vol. 14, hard cover only from Vol. 15

1. TAKEUTI/ZARING. Introduction to Axiomatic Set Theory.
2. OXTOBY. Measure and Category. 2nd ed.
3. SCHAEFFER. Topological Vector Spaces.
4. HILTON/STAMMBACH. A Course in Homological Algebra.
5. MACLANE. Categories for the Working Mathematician.
6. HUGHES/PIPER. Projective Planes.
7. SERRE. A course in Arithmetic.
8. TAKEUTI/ZARING. Axiomatic Set Theory.
9. HUMPHREYS. Introduction to Lie Algebras and Representation Theory. 2nd printing, revised.
10. COHEN. A Course in Simple Homotopy Theory.
11. CONWAY. Functions of One Complex Variable. 2nd ed.
12. BEALS. Advanced Mathematical Analysis.
13. ANDERSON/FULLER. Rings and Categories of Modules.
14. GOLUBITSKY/GUILLEMIN. Stable Mappings and Their Singularities.
15. BERBERIAN. Lectures in Functional Analysis and Operator Theory.
16. WINTER. The Structure of Fields.
17. ROSENBLATT. Random Processes. 2nd ed.
18. HALMOS. Measure Theory.
19. HALMOS. A Hilbert Space Problem Book.
20. HUSEMOLLER. Fibre Bundles. 2nd ed.
21. HUMPHREYS. Linear Algebraic Groups.
22. BARNES/MACK. An Algebraic Introduction to Mathematical Logic.
23. GREUB. Linear Algebra. 4th ed.
24. HOLMES. Geometric Functional Analysis and Its Applications.
25. HEWITT/STROMBERG. Real and Abstract Analysis. 4th printing.
26. MANES. Algebraic Theories.
27. KELLEY. General Topology.
28. ZARISKI/SAMUEL. Commutative Algebra I.
29. ZAR

38 GRAUERT/FRITZSCHE. Several Complex Variables.
39 ARVESON. An Invitation to $C^*$-Algebras.
40 KEMENY/SNELL/KNAPP. Denumerable Markov Chains. 2nd ed.
41 APOSTOL. Modular Functions and Dirichlet Series in Number Theory.
42 SEERE. Linear Representations of Finite Groups.
43 GILLMAN/JERISON. Rings of Continuous Functions.
44 KENDIG. Elementary Algebraic Geometry.
45 LOEVE. Probability Theory. 4th ed. Vol. 1.
46 LOEVE. Probability Theory. 4th ed. Vol. 2.
47 MOISE. Geometric Topology in Dimensions 2 and 3.
48 SACHS/WU. General Relativity for Mathematicians.
49 GRUENBERG/WEIR. Linear Geometry. 2nd ed.
50 EDWARDS. Fermat's Last Theorem.
51 KLINGENBERG. A Course in Differential Geometry.
52 HARTSHORNE. Algebraic Geometry.
53 MANIN. A Course in Mathematical Logic.
54 GRAVER/WATKINS. Combinatorics with Emphasis on the Theory of Graphs.
55 BROWN/PEARCY. Introduction to Operator Theory. Vol. 1: Elements of Functional Analysis.
56 MASSEY. Algebraic Topology: An Introduction.
57 CROWELL/FOX. Introduction to Knot Theory.
58 KOBLITZ. $p$-adic Numbers, $p$-adic Analysis, and Zeta-Functions.
59 LANG. Cyclotomic Fields.
60 ARNOLD. Mathematical Methods in Classical Mechanics.
61 WHITEHEAD. Elements of Homotopy Theory.
62 KARGAPOLOV/MERZLJAKOV. Fundamentals of the Theory of Groups.
63 BOLLOBAS. Graph Theory—An Introductory Course.
64 EDWARDS. Fourier Series, Volume 1. second edition.
65 WELLS. Differential Analysis on Complex Manifolds.
66 WATERHO