nts not in $K$, then each element of $K$ commutes with all the elements of $Q$.

Proof. Let $\lambda$ be an arbitrary element of $Q$, not in $K$. Then $1, \lambda$ is a basis for $Q$ over $K$, so every element has the form $a + \lambda b$, for some $a, b \in K$. Let $k \in K$; then $k \lambda = a_1 + b_1$, for some $a_1, b_1 \in K$. But if $c, d \in K, d \neq 0$, then there is an element $\alpha \in \mathrm{Aut}_K Q$ such that $\lambda^\alpha = c + \lambda d$, and so, since $(k \lambda)^\alpha = k^\alpha \lambda^\alpha = k \lambda^\alpha$, we have:

$$(a_1 + \lambda b_1)^\alpha = k(c + \lambda d),$$
$$a_1 + (c + \lambda b_1)k_1 = kc + k \cdot \lambda d,$$
$$a_1 + cb_1 + \lambda \cdot db_1 = kc + k \lambda \cdot d$$
$$= kc + a_1 d + \lambda \cdot b_1 d.$$

Hence $a_1 + cb_1 = a_1 d + kc$ and $db_1 = b_1 d$, for all $c, d \in K, d \neq 0$. If $c = 0$, then $a_1 = a_1 d$, and so $a_1 = 0$ or $d = 1$; but if $d = 1$ is the only element in $K^*$, then $K = GF(2)$ and $Q$ must have four elements, and so is $GF(4)$, which is a contradiction (for then $Q$ is its own kernel). Hence we may conclude that $a_1 = 0$. Then we have $cb_1 = kc$, for all $c \in K$, and $db_1 = b_1 d$, for all $d \in K^*$. If $c = 1$, then putting $b_1

Clearly $x^* \in K$ for all $x \in K$ and, in fact, $v$ is a homomorphism of $F^*$ into $K^*$. Let $N = (F^*)^*$; then the following simple example shows that, in general, $N \neq K^*$ so that $v$ does not map $F^*$ onto $K^*$. Take $F$ to be the field of complex numbers and $\Gamma = \langle y \rangle$ where $(a + ib)^* = a - ib$. Then, clearly, $K$ is the field of reals and $(a + ib) = (a + ib)(a - ib) = a^2 + b^2$. Thus every element of $N$ is positive so that $N \neq K^*$.

Now let $\phi$ be any mapping from $N$ into the group $\Gamma$ with the single requirement that $\phi$ maps the identity of $F^*$ (for the identity must lie in $N$) onto the identity of $\Gamma$. Combining $y$ and $\phi$ we have a mapping $v = v\phi$ from $F^*$ into $\Gamma$. For any $x \in F^*$ we shall write $x^*$ for $x^*$ to emphasize the fact that $x^*$ is an automorphism in $\Gamma$.

We now define a system $F_\phi$ as follows: the elements of $F_\phi$ are the elements of $F$, addition in $F_\phi$ is the same as addition in $F$ while the multiplication $\odot$ is defined by

$$x \odot y = xy^{n\alpha}, \quad 0 \odot y = 0 \quad \text{for all} \quad x, y \in F, \quad x \neq 0.$$ (1)

Since $x \odot(y + z) = x(y + z)^{n\alpha} = x(y^{n\alpha} + z^{n\alpha}) = xy^{n\alpha} + xz^{n\alpha} = x \odot y + x \odot z, F_\phi$ satisfies the left distributive law.

Consider the equation $x \odot

since $(xy^{a+b})^a = (x \odot y)^a = (xy)^a$. Hence associativity in $F_\phi$ requires that $\alpha_{xy} = \alpha_a \alpha_{xo}$, so that $\alpha$ is an anti-homomorphism; but $v$ is a homomorphism and so $\phi$ must be an anti-homomorphism. The converse is obvious. $\square$

Corollary. A finite André quasifield is associative if and only if $\phi$ is a homomorphism from $N = K^*$ into the group $\Gamma$.

Proof. Since $F$ is finite $\Gamma$ is cyclic so that any anti-homomorphism is a homomorphism. That $N = K^*$ follows by considering the orders (see the next exercise). $\square$

Exercise 9.4. If $F$ is finite show that $N = K^*$.

Lemma 9.4. The following conditions on the André quasifield $F_\phi$ are equivalent

(i) $F_\phi$ is a division ring,
(ii) $F_\phi$ is a field,
(iii) $F_\phi$ is isomorphic to $F$,
(iv) $k^\phi = \varepsilon$ for all $k$ in $N$ where $\varepsilon$ is the identity of $\Gamma$.

Proof. Suppose that $F_\phi$ is a division ring. Then $F_\phi$ satisfies the right distributive law so that for all $a, b, x \in F^*$ we have

$$ax^a + bx^\beta = (a + b)x^\lambda$$

(1)

where $\alpha = \alpha_a, \beta = \beta_a, \lambda = \alpha_{a+b}$. Regarding $a$ and $b$ as fixed, (1) is an identity in $x$ and so, replacing $x$ by $xy$, we have

$$a(x^a y^a) + b(x^\beta y^\beta) = (a + b)(x^\lambda y^\lambda) = [(a + b)x^\lambda]y^\lambda.$$

(2)

Using (1), (2) becomes

$$ax

Theorem 9.5. Let $F = GF(p^n)$ where $p$ is a prime. Then there exists an André quasifield of order $p^n$ which is not a field if and only if (a) $p$ is odd and $n \geq 2$ or (b) $p = 2$ and $n \geq 2$ is not a prime.

Proof. In view of Lemma 9.4, it is only necessary to show that we can find a mapping $\phi$ from some subfield $K$ of $F, K \neq F$, into the integers modulo $m$, where $m$ is the dimension of $F$ over $K$, such that some element of $K$ other than 0 or 1 is mapped onto something other than 0. If $p$ is odd and $n \geq 2$ then we choose $K = GF(p)$ and send $-1$ onto 1 in $Z_n$. If $p = 2$ and $n$ is a prime, then $GF(2)$ is the only subfield possessed by $F$, and $\phi$ is completely determined on $GF(2)$ by $1^n = 0$ and so $F_0$ must be a field. If, however, $n$ is not a prime then there is a field $GF(2^n)$ properly contained between $GF(2)$ and $GF(2^n)$; let $K = GF(2^n)$, then $K^*$ contains a non-identity element which we can map onto 1 in $Z_{min}$.

Since an associative quasifield is a nearfield we shall call an associative André quasifield an André nearfield.

Exercise 9.5. Find the finite fields $F = GF(q)$ for which there exist André nearfields $F_\phi$ which are not fields.

One case in Exercise 9.5 is so important that we include it here as a lemma:

Lemma 9.6. If $q$ is an odd prime power and $F = GF(q^2)$, then there always exists an André nearfield $F_\phi$ whose kernel is $GF(q)$ and such that the elements of the kernel

As a further example, we could see that there are eight ways to construct $F_{\phi}$ if $F = GF(25)$, one of which is a field, one of which is an associative system which is not a field and the other six of which are not associative. But note that the somewhat deeper problem of deciding whether the seven non-desarguesian planes coordinatized by these quasi-fields are all perhaps isomorphic is not settled by this discussion: this suggests that quasifields are not totally satisfactory objects when we want to ask questions about isomorphism between translation planes.

We shall see in Chapter X that all finite Hall planes are contained in the class of André planes (that is, the planes coordinatized by André quasifields). It is also true; although we shall not prove it, that the only finite André planes with non-soluble collineation groups are the desarguesian planes and the Hall planes.

Exercise 9.7. Determine all elements $x$ of multiplicative order two in an André quasifield $F_{\phi}$.

4. A Class of Division Rings

Among the many classes of division rings known there is one which we shall exhibit since it includes many interesting special cases. We shall just pull it out of the hat, as it were, instead of building it up as we did in the two preceding sections.

Let $F$ be a skewfield with centre $Z$ (so that $Z$ is a field), and let $\theta$ be an anti-automorphism of $F$ of finite order $m$ and $a, b$ elements of $F$, all such that

$$F \text{ has finite dimension over } Z \text{ and } xx^{\theta} \text{ is in } Z \text{ for all } x \text{ in } F;$$

(1)

$$a = x^{1+\theta} + xb \text{ has no solution for } x \text{ in } F.$$

(2)

(If $xx^{\theta} = y$ then, since $y$ is in $Z$, $x^{\theta} = x^{-1} y = yx^{-1}$ so that $xx^{\theta} = y = x^{\theta} x$; thus we may write $x^{1+\theta} \text{ or } x

so $F$ has finite dimension over $K$ as well; let $k$ be the dimension of $F$ over $K$. Then $D$ has dimension $2k$ over $K$, and $K$ is easily seen to be contained in the centre of $D$. Thus, since $D$ is finite dimensional over its centre, in order to show that $(x + \lambda y)(z + \lambda t) = (p + \lambda q)$ has a unique solution for one factor on the left, given the other and $p + \lambda q$, it is only necessary to show that the only solutions of $(x + \lambda y)(z + \lambda t) = 0((= 0 + \lambda 0)$ are $x + \lambda y = 0$ or $z + \lambda t = 0$ (see Exercise 8.3). Putting the right hand side of (3) equal to 0 gives:

$$
xz + aty^\theta = 0,
$$

$$
zy + x^\theta t + y^\theta bt = 0.
$$

Multiplying the first equation of (4) on the right by $y$, the second on the left by $x$ and subtracting yields

$$
aty^{1+\theta} - x^{1+\theta} - xy^\theta bt = 0.
$$

Now if $t = 0$ the equations of (4) give $xz = zy = 0$ so that either $x = y = 0$ or $z = 0$. So we may assume that $t \neq 0$ and, since $y^{1+\theta}$ is in $Z$. (5) becomes

$$
ay^{1+\theta} - x^{1+\theta} - xy^\theta b = 0.
$$

If $y = 0$ then (6) implies that $x = 0$, so assume $y \neq 0$. Let $x = x_1 y$ so that $x^\theta = y^\theta x_1^\theta$; then $x^{1+\theta} = x_1 y^{1+\theta} x_1^\theta = x_1^{1+\theta} y^{1+\theta}$, since $y^{1+\theta}$ is in $Z$. Then (6

*Exercise 9.11. Show that the quaternions, as defined in (b) above, could also have been defined as a four-dimensional vector space $Q$ over the reals, with the basis elements 1, $i, j, k$ and multiplication defined by the rules $1x = x1 = x$ for all $x$ in $Q; ij = -ji = k; jk = -kj = ij; ki = -ik = j; i^2 = j^2 = k^2 = -1$; if $x$ is in the reals then $x$ commutes with each of $i, j, k$.

*Exercise 9.12. Show that the mapping $\theta$ defined on the quaternions by $(x + iy + jz + kt) = x - ij - jz - kt$ is an anti-automorphism, and that $(x + iy + jz + kt)^{1+0}$ is a real number and, hence, is in the centre of $Q$.

Taking the quaternions as our skewfield $F$ we give a further example.

Case (c). Let $F$ be the quaternions and choose $a = -1, b = 0, \theta$ as in Exercise 9.12; then $D$ is a non-associative division ring, called the Cayley-Dickson algebra.

*Exercise 9.13. Show that the Cayley-Dickson algebra as defined in (c) satisfies both inverse properties, but is not associative.

(Properly interpreted, the Cayley-Dickson algebras are the only IP division rings which are not associative: this is the Bruck-Kleinfeld Theorem, see Chapter VI.) We now come to the examples which are most interesting for the study of finite projective planes. If $F$ is finite then it is a field and consequently $\theta$ must be an automorphism. This forces the division ring $D$ to have some additional properties which we now study.

In any quasilinear $Q$ the associator $[r, s, t]$ of three elements $r, s, t$ of $Q$ was defined by $[r, s, t] = (r s

the equation in (2). Since $D$ is associative, every associator is zero and so, putting $t = k = 1$ and $y = 0$, (8) tells us that $x^{\theta^2} = x$ and $b(x^{\theta^2} - x^2) = 0$ for all $x$. Since $\theta \neq 1$ this implies $\theta^2 = 1$ and $b = 0$. Putting $b = 0$ in (8) we have $t^2 k\left(a^0 - a\right) = 0$ for all $t, k, y$. But this is true if and only if $a^0 = a$; i.e., if and only if $a$ is in the subfield $K$ of elements fixed by $\theta$. Since $\theta^2 = 1, K$ must be $GF(q)$ where $F$ is $GF(q^2)$ and $\theta$ is given by $x^0 = x^4$ for all $x$ in $F$. But as $x$ varies over $F, x^{1+0}$, which is $x^{1+q}$, varies over all of $K$ so that there is a value of $x$ in $F$ such that $x^{1+0} = a$; this violates (2) (recall that $b = 0$), and proves the lemma. $[\quad]$

Note that we have proved more:

**Lemma 9.9.** If $F$ is finite, then $D$ is associative if and only if $\theta = 1$.

To construct $D$ we have assumed the existence of elements $a, b$ of $F$ and an anti-automorphism $\theta$ satisfying certain conditions. It is now natural to see how restrictive our conditions are. Since $\theta \neq 1$, if $F$ is finite then $F$ must be $GF(q)$ where $p$ is a prime and $n \neq 1$. We now show that this condition is sufficient for the existence of a non-trivial example.

**Theorem 9.10.** If $F = GF(p^n)$ where $p$ is a prime and $n > 1$, then there is a

5. The Dickson Commutative Division Rings

Our last example of a division ring will be commutative but not associative. The construction is similar to that of the previous section, in the sense that we let $F$ be a finite field, $D$ a two-dimensional vector space over $F$ with basis elements 1, $\lambda$ and we define a multiplication on $D$.

Let $F = GF(p^n)$ where $p$ is an odd prime and $n > 1$ and let $a$ be any element which is not a square in $F$. If $\theta$ is an automorphism of $F$ given by $x^\theta = x^{r^n}$, $1 \leq r < n$ then we define multiplication in $D$ by:

$$\left(x + \lambda y\right)\left(z + \lambda t\right) = \left(xz + ay^\theta t^\theta\right) + \lambda yz + xt$$

(1)

Theorem 9.12. $D$ is a commutative division ring and is never associative.

Proof. Clearly, from the definition, multiplication in $D$ is commutative. As in the proof of Theorem 9.7, to prove that $D$ is a division ring we need only verify that it has no non-zero divisors.

If we put the right hand side of (1) equal to zero we have

$$xz + ay^\theta t^\theta = 0.$$

(2)

If $z = 0$ then either $t = 0$ or $x = y = 0$, so we may assume $z \neq 0$. Solving the first equation of (2) for $x$ and substituting in the second we get $yz - ay^\theta t^{1+\theta} z^{-1} = 0$, which yields

$$z^2 = a1^{\theta-1} t^{\theta+1} = ay^{\theta-1} t^{\theta+1}, \text{ if } y \neq 0.$$

(3)

But every factor of (3) is a square except $a$ and so $z$ must be zero. This is a contradiction and, hence, $y = 0$; it is now easy to see that $

6. The Hughes Planes

In the preceding sections we have exhibited non-desarguesian projective planes by finding quasifields which are not skewfields. In this section we exhibit a class of finite projective planes, called the Hughes planes, which cannot be coordinated by any linear PTR. For any odd prime power $q$, there exists a Hughes planes of order $q^2$ and the smallest, i.e., of order 9, was first discovered by Veblen and Wedderburn.

A second property which distinguishes the Hughes plane from all the other examples given is that, for any given Hughes plane $\mathcal{H}$, the full collineation group of $\mathcal{H}$ does not fix a point or line of $\mathcal{H}$. The Hughes planes are, in fact, the only known finite non-desarguesian projective planes with this property.

If $q$ is any odd prime power then, by Lemma 9.6, there is always at least one nearfield $N$ of order $q^2$ whose kernel is $F = GF(q)$ and such that every element of $F$ commutes with each element of $N$. We shall use the elements of $N$ to construct a Hughes plane $\mathcal{H}$ of order $q^2$.

Let $V = \{(x_1, x_2, x_3)\} \in N, i = 1, 2, 3$. Define addition of $V$ by $(x_1, x_2, x_3) + (y_1, y_2, y_3) = (x_1 + y_1, x_2 + y_2, x_3 + y_3)$ (note that we are really using the symbol $+$ for two distinct operations, namely addition in $V$ and addition in $N$; however this should not cause any confusion), and define a left scalar multiplication by the elements of $N$ by $k(x_1, x_2, x_3) = (kx_1, xk_2, kx_3)$. In other words we make $V$ into a sort of "left vector space over $N$". The points of $\mathcal{H}$ will now be the elements of $V$, other than $(0, 0

$A^{q^2+q+1} = kI$, for some $k$ in $GF(q)$, and no smaller power of $A$ has this property. Thus $A$ has order $q^2+q+1$ as a permutation on the points of $\mathcal{H}$. We now define lines of $\mathcal{H}$ to be the point sets

$$L(t) A^m = \{A^m x\} \mid \langle x \rangle \in L(t)\}$$

for $0 \leq m \leq q^2+q$, where either $t = 1$, or $t$ is an arbitrary element of $N \setminus F$.

**Theorem 9.14.** If $\mathcal{H}$ is the set of points and lines defined above with incidence given by set theoretic inclusion then $\mathcal{H}$ is a finite projective plane of order $q^2$.

**Proof.** The number of points of $\mathcal{H}$ is equal to the number of elements of $V$ other than $(0,0,0)$ divided by the number which give the same point of $\mathcal{H}$. Since this latter is the same as the number of non-zero elements of $N$, the number of points of $\mathcal{H}$ is $q^2 - 1/q^2 - 1 = q^2 + q^2 + 1$.

Clearly for any $t$ the number of points on $L(t)$ is $q^2 + 1$ and thus, since every other line is the image of one of these point sets under an element of $GL_3(q)$, every line contains exactly $q^2 + 1$ points.

The number of lines is merely the number of distinct $L(t)$ multiplied by the number of possible powers of $A$, i.e., $(q^2 - q + 1)(q^2 + q + 1) = q^2 + q^2 + 1$. Thus, by Exercise 3.11, the theorem will be proved if we show that any two distinct lines intersect in a unique point.

Whether $\mathcal{H}$ is a projective plane or not it is clear that each mapping $A^i$ preserves incidence in $\mathcal{H}$. Thus, in order to show that any

and this simplifies to

$$\left(yv + zb\right)\left(b^{-1}a + t\right) + y\left(u - vb^{-1}a\right) = 0.$$ (5)

If $t = 1$ then it is easy to see that (2) and (3) have a unique common solution for the point $\langle(x, y, z)\rangle$. But if $t \neq 1$ then $t$ is not in $F$ and so, in this case, $w = b^{-1}a + t$ is non-zero. Thus (5) becomes $(yv + zb)w = -y(u - vb^{-1}a)$ or, multiplying through by $w^{-1}$ and collecting terms

$$y\left(v + \left(u - vb^{-1}a\right)w^{-1}\right) + zb = 0.$$ (6)

Since $b \neq 0$, (6) and (2) now have a unique common solution for the point $\langle(x, y, z)\rangle$.

Case (b): $b = 0, a \neq 0$. In this case (3) becomes

$$y\left(u + vt\right) + za = 0$$ (7)

and now, since $a \neq 0$, (7) and (2) have a unique common point.

Case (c): $a = b = 0$. These conditions imply

$$a_{13} + a_{33} = a_{11} + a_{31}$$ and $a_{23} = a_{21}$. $$(8)

But now consider the point $P = \langle(1, 0, -1)\rangle$. From (8) it is immediate that $PA^m = (c, 0, -c)$, where $c = a_{11} - a_{33}$, and, since $A^m$ is non-singular, $c \neq 0$ so that $PA^m = P$. Thus, by the original choice of $A$, $m = 0$ $(\mod q^2 + q + 1)$ and $L(t)A^m = L(t)$. But now it is easy to see that

In order to show that $\mathcal{H}$ is non-desarguesian we will now coordinateize it in such a way that the resulting PTR is not even linear. Using ordered triples to have the same meaning as in the earlier parts of this section, we now coordinateize $\mathcal{H}$ by the method introduced in Chapter V. Let $(\infty)$ be $(0, 0, 1)$; $(0)$ be $(1, 0, 0)$; $(0, 0)$ be $(0, 1, 0)$ and $(1)$ be $(1, 0, -1)$. The line $l_{w}$ is, in the earlier representation, the line $y = 0$ and the new $x$-axis and $y$-axis are the earlier lines $z = 0$ and $x = 0$ respectively. We can now label the points of the new $y$-axis by letting $(0, 1, v)$ be $(0, v)$ in our new system. Every line through $(1)$, or $(1, 0, -1)$, is a line of the form $x + yt + z = 0$. The point $(v, 0)$ on the $x$-axis will be the point $(u, 1, 0)$ which is collinear with $(1, 0, -1)$ and $(0, 1, v)$. But $(1, 0, -1)$ and $(0, 1, v)$ are on the line $L(-v)$, if $v \neq F$, from which it follows that $u + 1(-v) + 0 = 0$ or $u = v$. If $v \in F$, then it is obvious that $u = v$ and thus $(v, 0)$ is the point $(v, 1, 0)$.

Since the point $(m)$ is on $l_{w}$, it will be a point of the form $(1, 0, v)$. Furthermore $(m)$ is the point on $l_{w}$, which is collinear with $(1, 1, 0)$ and $(0, 1, m)$. Let $xa + yb + zc + (xa' + yb' + zc') t = 0$ be the line joining $(1, 1, 0)$ and

where $e + vf + (e' + vf')s = 0$, so $(u, 1, v)$ is on $m_2$. In all cases, we find that $(u, 1, v)$ is on both $m_1$ and $m_2$, so $(u, v)$ is $(u, 1, v)$. So we have:

**Lemma 9.16.** If $\mathcal{H}$ is coordinatized as above, then $(u, v)$ is $(u, 1, v)$, $(m)$ is $(1, 0, -m)$ and $(\infty)$ is $(0, 0, 1)$.

Now we shall investigate the ternary ring for $\mathcal{H}$, where we use $T(a, b, c)$ for the ternary operation, and let $a \oplus b = T(1, a, b)$, $a \otimes b = T(a, b, 0)$. In order to find the value of $T(m, u, v)$, we consider the line $l$ which contains $(1, 0, -m)$ and $(u, 1, v)$, and let $(0, 1, k)$ be the intersection of $l$ with the $y$-axis; then $k = T(m, u, v)$. Let $l$ be the line

$$xa + yb + zc + (xa' + yb' + zc')t = 0.$$

Then:

$$a - mc + (a' - mc')t = 0,$$

(5)

$$ua + b + vc + (ua' + b' + vc')t = 0.$$

(6)

**Lemma 9.17.** For all $a$ and $b$, $a \oplus b = a + b$.

**Proof.** Let $m = 1$ in (5). Then $a - c + (a' - c')t = 0$. So if $t = 1$, we have $a + a' = c + c'$, and (6) becomes $u(a + a') + (b + b') + v(c + c') = 0$, or $(u + v) \cdot (a + a')

Corollary 1. The Hughes planes are non-desarguesian.

The Hughes planes have many other interesting properties, for example the desarguesian subplane $H_0$ of the plane $H$ is left invariant by Aut $H$, but we have not yet established sufficient machinery to prove them all. For our purposes the main interest at this stage is that we have shown the existence of a finite projective plane which is not a translation plane. In fact, by Exercise 4.28, we also have

Corollary 2. A Hughes plane is not $(V, l)$-transitive for any choice of $V$ or $l$ and hence is not a translation plane or a dual translation plane.

References

Each class of planes introduced in this chapter has been the object of much research and, not surprisingly, much more is known about them than the basic properties which we have established. In particular their collination groups have been studied in detail. The list of references given here is in no sense complete, and the interested student should consult Dembowski [1] before reading the specialized papers.

Theorem 9.2 is due to Jha [6], while Theorem 9.11 is proved in [5]. Finally we remark that the construction of the André planes has been generalised by Foulser [2] to give a larger class of planes.

1. Dembowski, H.P.: Finite geometries. Berlin-Heidelberg-New York: Springer 1968.
2. Foulser, D.A.: A generalization of André's systems. Math. Z. 100, 380-395 (1967).
3. Hughes, D.R.: Collineation groups of non-desarguesian planes. I. The Hall Veblen-Wedderburn systems. Am. J. Math. 81, 921-938 (1959).
4. — Collineation groups of non-desarguesian planes. II. Some seminuclear division algebras. Am. J. Math. 82, 113-119 (1960).
5. — Kleinfeld, E.: Seminuclear extensions of Galos fields. Am. J. Math. 82, 389-392 (

X. Derivation

1. Introduction

In this chapter we shall investigate, in a simple special form, a method of construction of finite projective planes called "derivation". We shall show that Hall planes and some André planes can be constructed from desarguesian planes in this way and, as a corollary, we obtain the result that every Hall plane is an André plane. We shall also prove a number of results relating the collineation groups of a plane and its "derived plane": these results are useful in establishing the structure of the "derived plane". In particular, we use these results to study the collineation group of the Hall plane in considerable detail.

2. The Basic Results and Definitions

Let $\mathcal{A}$ be a finite affine plane of order $n^2$, and let $l_\infty$ be its special line (so that $\mathcal{A} = \mathcal{P}^\infty$, for the appropriate projective plane $\mathcal{P}$). Let $\mathcal{S}$ be a subset of $n+1$ special points such that, for every pair of distinct affine points $X, Y$ of $\mathcal{A}$ for which $X Y$ meets $l_\infty$ in $\mathcal{S}$, there is a Baer subplane of $\mathcal{P}$ containing $X, Y$ and $\mathcal{S}$. Then we will say that $\mathcal{S}$ is a derivation set for $\mathcal{A}$ (or for $\mathcal{P}$). If $\mathcal{B}$ is a Baer subplane of $\mathcal{P}$ containing $\mathcal{S}$ then we say that $\mathcal{B}$, or $\mathcal{B}^\infty$, belongs to $\mathcal{S}$.

Lemma 10.1. Let $\mathcal{S}$ be a derivation set of an affine plane $\mathcal{A} = \mathcal{P}^\infty$, and let $\{B_1, B_2, \ldots\}$ be the Baer subplanes of $\mathcal{P}$ which belong to $\mathcal{S}$. If $\mathcal{A}_i = \mathcal{B}_i^\infty$ for each $i$, then $\mathcal{A}_i \cap \mathcal{A}_j$ consists of 0 or 1 points, if $i \neq j$.

Proof. Suppose

a point of $D_{g'}(\mathcal{A})$ is a point of $\mathcal{A}$;
a line of $D_{g'}(\mathcal{A})$ is either a line of $\mathcal{A}$ which meets $l_{\infty}$ in $\mathcal{S}'$ or is a Baer subplane $\mathcal{A} = B^{l_{\infty}}$ such that $\mathcal{B}$ contains $\mathcal{S}$;
incidence in $D_{g'}(\mathcal{A})$ is the natural containment relation.

**Theorem 10.2.** $D_{g'}(\mathcal{A})$ is an affine plane of order $n^2$.

**Proof.** Certainly $D_{g'}(\mathcal{A})$ has $n^4$ points, since its points are those of $\mathcal{A}$. Each of its lines is either a line of $\mathcal{A}$, in which it has exactly $n^2$ points, or is an affine Baer subplane of $\mathcal{A}$, which also has $n^2$ points.

Let $X$ and $Y$ be any two distinct points of $\mathcal{A}$ (or of $D_{g'}(\mathcal{A})$). If $XY$ meets $l_{\infty}$ in $\mathcal{S}'$, then $X$ and $Y$ are on the line $XY$ of $D_{g'}(\mathcal{A})$ and are in no Baer subplane containing $\mathcal{S}$; if $XY$ meets $l_{\infty}$ in $\mathcal{S}$ then the line $XY$ of $\mathcal{A}$ is not a line of $\mathcal{S}$, while the Baer subplane $X, Y$ and $\mathcal{S}$ is. So $X$ and $Y$ are on a unique line of $D_{g'}(\mathcal{A})$.

Thus we have shown that $D_{g'}(\mathcal{A})$ is a set of $n^4$ points such that each line contains $n^2$ points and every pair of distinct points is on a unique line, and so, by Exercise 3.14, $D_{g'}(\mathcal{A})$ is an affine plane of order $n^2$.

Since Exercise 3.14 is so important to this

Proof. There are $n^2$ points of $\mathcal{D}_{g^f}(k)$, and its "lines" are the intersections of $k$ with the Baer subplanes of $\mathcal{A}$ belonging to $\mathcal{S}$. But two distinct points of $k$ are in a unique Baer subplane $\mathcal{A}$ belonging to $\mathcal{S}$, and since $k \cap \mathcal{A}_i$ contains more than one point, it is a line of $\mathcal{A}_i$. Thus $k \cap \mathcal{A}_i$ consists of exactly $n$ points. But now by Exercise 3.14 $\mathcal{D}_{g^f}(k)$ is an affine plane of order $n$.

A "line" of $\mathcal{D}_{g^f}(k)$ is the intersection of $k$ with a Baer subplane of $\mathcal{A}$ belonging to $\mathcal{S}$, and so does not meet $l_\infty$ in $\mathcal{S}'$.

Theorem 10.4. $\mathcal{D}_{g^f}(\mathcal{S})$ is a derivation set for $\mathcal{D}_{g^f}(\mathcal{A})$, and $\mathcal{D}_{g^f}(\mathcal{D}_{g^f}(\mathcal{A}))$ is naturally isomorphic to $\mathcal{A}$.

Proof. An immediate corollary of Lemma 10.3. (Remember that we use $\mathcal{S}'$ for the complement of $\mathcal{D}_{g^f}(\mathcal{S})$ on $l_\infty$).

Clearly a collineation of $\mathcal{A}$ must send a derivation set onto a derivation set. Furthermore we have

Theorem 10.5. If $\alpha \in \text{Aut} \mathcal{A}$, then $\mathcal{D}_{g^f}(\mathcal{A}) \cong \mathcal{D}_{g^f}(\mathcal{A})$.

Proof. Almost obvious. We leave it as a simple exercise.

Theorem 10.6. If $\alpha \in \text{Aut} \mathcal{A}$ and $\mathcal{S}^\infty = \mathcal{S}$ then $\alpha$ induces an automorphism of $\mathcal{D}_{g

Exercise 10.1. Show that if $\alpha$ is a translation of $\mathcal{A}$ then $\alpha$ induces a translation of $\mathcal{D}_\mathcal{F}(\alpha)$. (Note that in the proof of the last theorem we showed this if the centre of $\alpha$ is in $\mathcal{G}'$.)

3. Desarguesian Planes

Of course there is no reason why an arbitrary plane should have a derivation set, but the desarguesian planes do.

Theorem 10.8. $\mathcal{A}_2(q^2)$ always has a derivation set.

Proof. Let $\mathcal{S}$ be the subset of all points $(b)$ on $l_{\omega}$, $b \in GF(q)$, plus $(\infty)$. We must show that if $X$ and $Y$ are distinct points of $\mathcal{A} = \mathcal{A}_2(q^2)$ and if $XY = l_{\omega} \in \mathcal{S}$, then $X, Y$ and $\mathcal{S}$ are in a Baer subplane of $\mathcal{A}$. Since the translations of $\mathcal{A}$ fix $\mathcal{S}$ and are transitive on the points of $\mathcal{A}$, we may assume that $X = (0, 0)$. The line $XY$ passes through $\mathcal{S}$ and the group of $(X, l_{\omega})$-homologies fixes $\mathcal{S}$ and is transitive on the points of $XY$, other than $X$. Thus we may assume that $Y$ is any point on a line joining $(0, 0)$ to a point of $\mathcal{S}$ and, in particular, that $Y$ lies in the subplane of $\mathcal{A}$ coordinated by $GF(q)$ and thus, since $\mathcal{A}_2(q)$ is a Baer subplane of $\mathcal{A}_2(q^2)$, the theorem is proved. []

Now that we know that desarguesian planes are derivable we are immediately faced with the problem of determining their derived planes. As a first step in this direction we prove

Theorem 10.9. If $\mathcal{A}$ is desarguesian then, unless $\mathcal{A}$ has order 4, $\mathcal{D}_\mathcal{F

of all shears $\sigma_{a}$ is isomorphic to the additive group of $GF(q)$, $q = 2$ and $\mathcal{A}$ has order 4.

In view of the last two theorems we now have a way of constructing non-desarguesian planes. Our next problem is to identify them. But first we set two exercises.

**Exercise 10.2.** Let $K$ be a right quasifield of order $n^2$, and let $\mathcal{A}$ be a dual translation plane coordinated by $K$. If $\mathcal{A}$ has a derivation set $\mathcal{S}$ containing $(\infty)$, then show that $D_{gf}(\mathcal{A})$ has a Baer subplane fixed pointwise by a group of collineations of order $n$. (Hint: try to imitate the proof of Theorem 10.9, first finding a subgroup of $(K, +)$ of order $n$.)

**Exercise 10.3.** Ket $\mathcal{S}$ and $\mathcal{T}$ be derivation sets for an affine plane $\mathcal{A}$, with $\mathcal{S} \cap \mathcal{T} = \emptyset$. Show that $\mathcal{T}$ is a derivation set for $D_{gf}(\mathcal{A})$, and that $D_{gf}D_{gf}(\mathcal{A}) = D_{gf}D_{gf}(\mathcal{A})$.

As a result of Exercise 10.3 (whose proof is easy, by the way), we can speak of multiple derivation leading to $D_{gf}_1D_{gf}_2\dots D_{gf}_n(\mathcal{A})$, where $S_1,S_2,\dots,S_n$ are mutually disjoint derivation sets. Note that the order in which the $S_i$ are written is irrelevant and so, by Theorem 10.4, if two were the same they could be deleted.

Before determining the plane $D_{gf}(\mathcal{A})$ of Theorems 10.8 and 10.9, we first look for other derivation sets in $\mathcal{A} = \mathcal{A}_2(q^2)$. If we wish to show that

be the collineation of $\mathcal{A}$ defined by the matrix:

$$\begin{vmatrix} k^{\sigma} & sk & 0 \\ 1 & s & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 \end{vmatrix}$$

where $s^{1+\sigma} = t$. (The determinant of this matrix is not zero since $k^{\sigma} \neq k$.) Then it is straightforward to verify that $\alpha$ maps $\mathcal{S}$ onto $\mathcal{S}_t$, and this proves the theorem. $\square$

It is obvious that $\mathcal{S}_t$ and $\mathcal{S}_u$ are disjoint if $t \neq u$, and we are now in a position to perform multiple derivation on the desarguesian plane.

**Theorem 10.12.** Let $K = GF(q^2)$, $F = GF(q) \subset K$ and $t_1, t_2, \dots, t_r$ be distinct elements of $F^*$. If $\mathcal{A} = \mathcal{A}_2(K)$ then $\mathcal{D}_{g_1}, \dots, \mathcal{D}_{g_r} (\mathcal{A}^*)$ is an André plane.

**Proof.** We prove some auxiliary results first.

(a) If $a \neq 0$ in $K$, then $x^{q-1} = a$ has 0 or $q-1$ solutions.

**Proof.** If both $g$ and $h$ in $K$ are solutions, that is $g^{q-1} = h^{q-1} = a$, then clearly $(gh^{-1})^{q-1} = 1$. But since $K^*$ is a cyclic group of order $q^2 - 1$, it has a unique cyclic subgroup of order $q - 1$, and so $x^{q-1} = 1$ has $q-1$ solutions; it is now easy to see that each of the elements $gx$ satisfies $(gx)^{q-1} = a$, and there are no other solutions.

(b) If $a \neq 0$ in $K$, if $b, c$ are elements of $

So we are given $m$ in $\mathcal{S}_t$, and $k$, and wish to consider the set of points $(x, y)$ in $\mathcal{A}$ satisfying $mx^2 + y = k$; i.e., the set of points $(x, k - mx^2)$, as $x$ ranges over $F$. If a line of $\mathcal{A}$ contains two such points, let the line be $[a, b]$ and the points $(x, k - mx^2)$ and $(y, k - mx^2)$. So $ax + k - mx^2 = b = ay + k - my^2$; but we now have an equation of the type of (b) above, with at least two solutions, and so it has exactly $q$ solutions. Thus our line contains exactly $q$ points in the distinguished set. So the set consists of $q^2$ points, every two points are on a common line and each of these common lines contains exactly $q$ points of the set. So the set is an affine plane (see Exercise 3.14). Its points at infinity are the points $(a)$ satisfying $ax + k - mx^2 = ay + k - my^2$, or $a(x - y) = m(x - y)^n$, or $a = m(x - y)^{n-1}$. But then $a^{n+1} = m^{n+1}(x - y)^{n-1} = t_i$ since $(x - y)^{n-1} = 1$ for all $x, y$ if $x \neq y$. So $(a)$ is in $\mathcal{S}_t$. Since at least $q + 1$ points on $[\infty]$ must be on lines joining two points of our special set, all $q + 1$ of the points of $\mathcal{S}_t$ will occur in this way.

Now if one of the $t_i$ is 1, but some element of $F^*$ is not a $t_j$, then the above method does not work, since we are required in the André construction to define $\mu(1) = 0$. Here we shall find a collineation which maps the collection of the sets $\mathcal{S}_t$ onto itself (that is, permutes them)

We now analyse the plane $D_H(\mathcal{A})$, where $\mathcal{A} = \mathcal{A}_H(q^2)$, and $\mathcal{S}$ is the derivation set of Theorem 10.8. We already know that this plane is an André plane (by Theorem 10.12), but we shall show that it is also a Hall plane. Anticipating this result, we denote it by $\mathcal{A}_H$. Let $m$ be a line of $\mathcal{A}$ which meets $l_\infty$ in a point of $\mathcal{S}$ then the subgroup of Aut.$\mathcal{A}$ which fixes $\mathcal{S}$ and consists of perspectivities with axis $m$ is merely the subgroup of $P\Gamma L_2(q)$ consisting of perspectivities with axis $m$ and centres on $l_\infty$. This group, which we denote by $\mathcal{A}$, has order $q(q-1)$. The group induced on $\mathcal{A}_H$ by $\mathcal{A}$ fixes a Baer subplane pointwise and, since any Baer subplane is a maximal subplane, only the identity can fix a point not in the Baer subplane. Thus, as $\mathcal{S}'$ has exactly $q(q-1)$ points, the group induced by $\mathcal{A}$ is transitive (and even regular) on $\mathcal{S}'$.

Next let $X$ be an affine point of $\mathcal{A}$, or of $\mathcal{A}_H$ since the point sets are the same. If $\Sigma$ denotes the group of $(X, l_\infty)$-homologies of $\mathcal{A}$ then $\Sigma$ is cyclic of order $q^2-1$ and, since it is transitive on the affine points on any line through $X$ (other than $X$ itself of course), $\Sigma$ induces a transitive permutation group on the Baer subplanes which belong to $\mathcal{S}$ and contain $X$. Thus $\Sigma$ induces on $\mathcal{A}_H$ a collination group which is (i) transitive on lines through $X$ which meet $\mathcal{S}^*$, and (ii) fixes every line through $X$ which meets $\mathcal

as well as (0, 0), (0), and ($\infty$). It also must contain the $q-1$ points on $[-1, 0]$ which are images of (1, 1) under the group of homologies above (since these are really induced by multiplication by elements of the kernel $K$). So $\mathcal{H}$ and $\mathcal{B}$ intersect in (0), ($\infty$), (0, 0) and $q$ points on the line $[-1, 0]$. This is enough to guarantee that $\mathcal{H} = \mathcal{B}$.

Now the subgroup $\Lambda$ of Baer collisions fixing every point of $\mathcal{B}$ has order $q(q-1)$. No non-identity element of $\Lambda$ can fix any point on the special line outside of $\mathcal{S}^*$, so $\Lambda$ must be transitive on the special points not in $S^*$. But it is also clear that $\Lambda$ is induced by a group of automorphisms of $Q$ (since it fixes (1, 1)) and this group fixes every element of $K$ (since $\mathcal{H} = \mathcal{B}$). It is immediate that $\Lambda$ is transitive (and regular) on the elements of $Q$ not in $K$.

Corollary. $\mathcal{A}_H$ is a Hall plane.

Proof. See the Corollary to Theorem 9.2.

Exercise 10.4. Generalize the proof of Theorem 10.12 to show: if the elements of $F^*$ are partitioned into two sets $t_1, \dots, t_r$ and $t_{r+1}, \dots, t_{q-1}$, then the multiply derived plane on $\mathcal{S}_{t_1}, \dots, \mathcal{S}_{t_r}$ is isomorphic to the multiply derived plane on $\mathcal{S}_{r+1}, \dots, \mathcal{S}_{q-1}$.

4. General Derivation

Before studying the derived (or multiply derived) desarguesian planes in more detail, we prove in this section that the class of derivable planes is quite large.

Theorem 10.14. Let $\

various subsets which are collinear in $\mathcal{A}$, any two points must be on a unique common line). Let $X = (\alpha_1 + a, b + b_1, b_2 + a + c)$ and $Y = (\alpha_2 + a, b + b_2, a + c)$ be any two points of $\mathcal{B}(a, b, c)$. If $\alpha_1 = \alpha_2$ then $X$ and $Y$ are on the line $[\alpha_1 + a + b]$ which clearly contains the $q$ points $(\alpha_1 + a + b, \beta a + c)$ of $\mathcal{B}(a, b, c)$. If $\alpha_1 \neq \alpha_2$, then $X$ and $Y$ are certainly on a line $[m, k]$ of $\mathcal{A}$, we want to show that $m$ is in $F$ so that the line $XY$ will have a "linear" equation.

By (d), the elements $\alpha, \beta, \delta$ in $R$ which satisfy $\alpha a + \alpha_2 a = \alpha_1 a, \beta a + b_1 a = \beta_2 a, \delta (\alpha a) = \beta a$ are all in $F$. Furthermore, by (e), there is an element $\lambda$ in $F$ such that

$$\lambda(\alpha_1 + a) - \lambda(\alpha_2 + a) = \delta[(\alpha_1 + a) - (\alpha_2 + a)].$$

Now it is easy to show that

$$\lambda(\alpha_1 + a) + (\beta_1 + a) = \lambda(\alpha_2 + a) + (\beta_2 + a) = k$$

say. Thus $X$ and $Y$ are on the line $[\lambda, k]$ which meets $l_\infty$ in $\mathcal{S}$. This line contains the point $(\alpha_1 + a, b, \beta a + c)$ of $\mathcal{B}(a, b, c)$ if and only if $\lambda(\alpha a + b) + \beta a + c = k$. But for each $\alpha$ in $F$, there will be a unique element $\beta$

$x_2, y_1$ since:

$$(x_1, y_1) = (1 \cdot (x_1 - x_2) + x_2, 0(x_1 - x_2) + y_1),$$
$$(x_2, y_2) = (0(x_1 - x_2) + x_2, \mu(x_1 - x_2) + y_1).$$

The latter equation follows from

$$\mu(x_1 - x_2) + y_1 = \lambda x_1 - \lambda x_2 + y_1 = k - \lambda x_2 = y_2.$$

Corollary 1. If $Q$ is a right quasilife of dimension two over its kernel and $\mathcal{A}$ is its affine plane, then $\mathcal{A}$ is derivable.

Corollary 2. If $D$ is a division ring of dimension two over its left or middle nucleus and $\mathcal{A}$ is its affine plane, then $\mathcal{A}$ is derivable.

Exercise 10.5. Using the notation of Theorem 10.14, show that $\mathcal{B}(a, b, c)$ and $\mathcal{B}(d, e, f)$ are equal if and only if $F^*a = F^*d, F^*a + b = F^*d + e$ and $F^*a + c = F^*d + f$; and that $\mathcal{B}(a, b, c)$ and $\mathcal{B}(d, e, f)$ are "parallel" if and only if $F^*a = F^*d$.

The derived plane of the second corollary will, of course, be a translation plane, but it is easy to see that those obtained from the first corollary are not translation planes in general; in fact they are not dual translations planes either. This gives us further examples (see Chapter IX) of planes which have no translation lines or points. It is even possible to show that the Hughes planes are derivable, and their derived planes form yet another new class of planes (with the exception of order 9).

Theorem 10.14 gives conditions for a given plane to be derivable, and if

(3) if $\lambda$ is in $F$ and $x$ is in $R$ then $\lambda*x = \lambda x$;
(4) $\mathcal{L}^* = \mathcal{D}_{\varphi}(\mathcal{S})$ consists of the points $(\lambda')$, $\lambda$ in $F$, and $(\infty)$;
(5) if $\lambda$ is in $F$ and $x$, $y$ are in $R$ then $T_1(\lambda, x) = \lambda x$ and $y = \lambda*x \oplus y$.

(Here we are writing $(x, y)', (m')$ etc. for the points of $\mathcal{A}_1$ (or the points of its special line) in the new coordinate system.)

**Proof.** We coordinateize $\mathcal{A}_1$ so that $[0, 0]'$ is the Baer subplane $\mathcal{B}(1, 0, 0)$ and $[0]'$ is $\mathcal{B}(t, 0, 0)$. Then we label the points of $[0, 0]'$ so that $(\alpha + \beta t, 0)'$ is $(\alpha, \beta)$ and we put $(0, 1)' = (t, 0)$. (Note that this is all the choice we have in setting up the coordinate system for $\mathcal{A}_1$.) Since $[1, 0]' = (1, 0) = (0(t-1) + 1, 0(t-1) + 0)$ and $(0, 1)' = (t, 0) = (t-1) + 1, 0(t-1) + 0)$, the line $[1, 1]'$ is $\mathcal{B}(t-1, 1, 0)$. Thus, by Exercise 10.5, the lines $[1, k]'$ have the form $\mathcal{B}(t-1, b, c)$. A point $(\alpha + \beta t, 0)'$ is on $\mathcal{B}(t-1, b, c)$ if $(\alpha, \beta)$ is in $\mathcal{B}(t-1, b, c)$, and thus $(

which is collinear with them. Imitating the proof of (3), it is an easy exercise to show that $\eta + \mu t = \lambda(\alpha + \beta t) + \gamma + \delta t$, and this proves (5).

**Exercise 10.6.** Prove(4) and complete the proof of(5) in Theorem 10.15.

We already know that the derived plane of a derivable translation plane is again a translation plane. In this case, if we knew the rule for general multiplication, the preceding theorem would completely specify the new quasifield.

**Theorem 10.16.** If the PTR $(R, T)$ of Theorem 10.15 is a quasifield, the multiplication in $(R, T_1)$ is given by:

$$(\alpha + \beta t)*(\gamma + \delta t) = -\eta - \mu t, \quad \text{if } \beta \neq 0$$

where

(1) $(\varrho + \sigma t)(-1 + \alpha t) = -\beta t$,
(2) $(\varrho + \sigma t)(\gamma + \eta t) = -\delta - \mu t$,
and by

$$a*((\gamma + \delta t) = \alpha \gamma + (\alpha \delta) t, \quad \text{if } \beta = 0.$$

**Proof.** The line $[\alpha + \beta t, 0]'$ is on $(0, 0)' = (0, 0)$ and on $(-1, \alpha + \beta t)' = (-1 + \alpha t, \beta t)$. If $\beta \neq 0$, then $[\alpha + \beta t, 0]'$ is not a line of the form $\mathcal{B}(x, y, z)$ (since $(0, 0)$ is on $\mathcal{B}(x, y, z)$ and if only if $\mathcal{B}(x, y, z) = \mathcal{B}(w, 0, 0)$ for some $w$, and $(-1 + \alpha t, \beta t)$ is on no line of the form $\mathcal{B}(w, 0,

Now Eq. (1) yields;

$$-r + asu = 0,$$
$$ar - s + vas = -b,$$

and these can be solved for $r$ and $s$ to give

$$r = -abu(a^2 u + av - 1)^{-1},$$
$$s = -b(a^2 u + av - 1)^{-1}.$$

Substituting for $r$ and $s$ in (2) gives;

$$b(acu - hu)(a^2 u + av - 1)^{-1} = d,$$
$$b(c - ahu - hv)(a^2 u + av - 1)^{-1} = -m,$$

and solving these two equations for $r$ and $m$ gives;

$$h = ac - b^{-1}dg(a),$$
$$m = bc - ad - dv/u,$$

where $g(a) = a^2 + (v/u)a - 1/u$. Every irreducible quadratic over $GF(q)$ is satisfied by some element in $GF(q^2)$, and so $\lambda^2 - v\lambda - u$ is an arbitrary irreducible quadratic over $GF(q)$. Hence (see Exercise 10.7), $g$ is also arbitrary.

It is now immediate that we can choose $\lambda$ to give us any Hall quasi-field for $\mathcal{A}_H$, since $a_*(c + \lambda d) = ac + \lambda ad$ follows from Theorem 10.16. []

**Exercise 10.7.** Show that any irreducible monic quadratic $g(x)$ over $GF(q)$ has the form $g(x) = x^2 + (v/u)x - 1/u$, where $x^2 - vx - u$ is also irreducible.

**Corollary.** Any two Hall planes of the same order are isomorphic.

In fact it is true that two infinite Hall planes are isomorphic if the quadratics which define them are equivalent. (Irreducible quadratics over a field $F$ are equivalent if they have zeros in the same quadratic extension field.) Quite probably the converse is true, but it has not been resolved yet.

We end this section

5. Inherited Collineation Groups

In Theorem 10.6 we observed that if $\mathcal{S}$ is a derivation set for an affine plane $\mathcal{A}$ and if $\alpha$ is a collineation of $\mathcal{A}$ with $\mathcal{S}^{\alpha} = \mathcal{S}$ then $\alpha$ induces a collineation of $\mathcal{D}_{\mathcal{g}}(\mathcal{A}) = \mathcal{A}_1$. We call $\alpha$ an inherited collineation of $\mathcal{A}_1$ and define the inherited collineation group of $\mathcal{A}_1$ as the collineation group induced by all collineations of $\mathcal{A}$ leaving $\mathcal{S}$ invariant. Often a determination of the inherited group gives useful information about the derived plane. As an example we shall investigate the inherited group of the Hall plane $\mathcal{A}_H$ regarded as the derived desarguesian plane. As we shall see the inherited group is especially important in this case because (a) it is (with two exceptions) the entire collineation group of the Hall plane, and (b) it is non-soluble, with the same exceptions.

We have already seen that the inherited group of $\mathcal{A}_H$ has the following properties: (i) it has a subgroup fixing every point of $\mathcal{S}'$ and transitive on $\mathcal{S}'^*$; (ii) it has a subgroup fixing every point of $\mathcal{S}^*$ and transitive on $\mathcal{S}'$.

In general the inherited group will only be a subgroup of the full collineation group of the derived plane. However, in the case of a finite Hall plane of order greater than 9 it is the full collineation group which means that the full collineation group of the Hall plane is the subgroup of Aut $\mathcal{A}_H(q^2)$ which leaves $\mathcal{S} = \{m\}|m = \infty$ or $m \in GF(q^2)$ invariant.

Theorem 10.18. The full collineation group of a Hall plane of order $q^2 > 9$ has two orbits of special points: one of length $q + 1$ the other of length $q^2 - q$

two planes have at least $q^2 - 2q - 1$ parallel classes in common, there are at least $q^2 - 2q - 1$ common special points which have the same coordinates in each plane. Let $M$ be the set of elements of $GF(q^2)$ assigned to the common special points. Then, since in any linear PTR the product $a*b$ of any two elements is given by $(0, a*b)$ which is the intersection of $[0]$ with the line joining $(a)$ to $(b, 0)$, $s \times x = sx$ for all $s \in M$ and all $x \in GF(q^2)$. Furthermore, since by the definition of $M$, there are no other common parallel classes, $M = \{s \in GF(q^2)\} \odot x = sx$ for all $x \in GF(q^2)$. But this implies that $M$ is closed under both addition and multiplication, i.e., that $M$ is a subfield of $GF(q^2)$. However no proper subfield of $GF(q^2)$ can have more than $q$ elements and so, as $|M| \geq q^2 - 2q - 1 > q$, $M$ must be $GF(q^2)$. This is a contradiction thus proving the theorem.

Corollary. The full collineation group of a finite Hall plane of order greater than 9 is the group inherited under derivation from the desarguesian plane.

Exercise 10.11. Show that for $q > 3$ the full collineation group of a Hall plane of order $q^2$ is non-soluble. (For $q \leq 3$ the full collineation group of a Hall plane behaves in a very different way, although the group is still non-soluble (for details see [1].

We have discussed derivation in considerable detail. This is mainly because it has given many "new" translation planes and the reader should feel that he has enough machinery at his disposal to perform the routine operations necessary to construct these "new planes". We have given the derivation of the desarguesian planes special attention for two reasons; firstly because it is the simplest example and secondly because deriv

In the exercises at the end of Chapter VII we showed that the elements of $V$ may be regarded as the points of a translation plane $\mathcal{A}$ whose lines are the additive cosets of the components of a spread; each component of the spread defining a parallel class of $\mathcal{A}$. If we construct a new translation plane $\mathcal{A}$ from $\mathcal{A}$ by removing the lines of some parallel classes in $\mathcal{A}$ and replacing them by "new lines", then the spread corresponding to $\mathcal{A}$ will have certain components in common with the spread of $\mathcal{A}$. This observation motivates the following definition; two partial spreads $W_1, W_2, \dots, W_t$ and $U_1, U_2, \dots, U_i$ are called replacements for each other if $W_1 \cup W_2 \cup \dots \cup W_t = U_1 \cup U_2 \cup \dots \cup U_i$ and $W_t \neq U_j$ for any $i$ or $j$. Either one of the partial spreads is said to be replaceable.

Exercise 10.12. If $W_1, W_2, \dots, W_g$ is a partial spread and if $U_1, U_2, \dots, U_i$ is a replacement for $W_1, W_2, \dots, W_t$ ($t \leq s$) show that $U_1, U_2, \dots, U_i, W_{t+1}, \dots, W_g$ is a partial spread.

Let $W_1, \dots, W_{g+1}$ be a spread and let $\mathcal{A}$ be the translation plane obtained from the $W_i$. If any partial spread of the given spread is replaceable, then replacing that partial spread by any one of its replacements will give a new spread and, hence, a new translation plane defined on the same points and having the parallel classes of the non-replaced components in common with $\mathcal{A}$. The reader should convince himself that derivation is a particular instance of this construction with $d = 2$. Examples with $d \neq 2$ are provided by the André planes of non-square order, but no other value

XI. Free Closures

1. Introduction

We want to consider here certain "free" methods by which projective planes can be generated. This leads us to consider problems about embedding configurations in planes, and about collineations. The basic ideas are very simple, and were first introduced in 1943 by Hall: let any configuration generate successively bigger and bigger configurations by introducing new elements each to be the "meet" of exactly two old elements which did not yet have an element in common. The union of the process will (usually) be a projective plane, called the free closure of the given configuration. This enables us to embed arbitrary configurations in projective planes and it enables us to construct projective planes with, for instance, only trivial collineations. We can characterize, under a finiteness condition, projective planes which are free closures, and we can decide, again under the same finiteness condition, when two configurations have isomorphic free closures; the collineation groups of these free closures are very difficult to identify, but in some cases it is easy to prove some surprising "Sylow-like" theorems about their finite subgroups (i.e. every finite subgroup is contained in a maximal finite subgroup, and all these maximal finite subgroups are conjugate). We say a little about homomorphisms and observe that polarities are very unlike the desarguesian case.

2. Configurations

A set $\mathcal{C}$ of points and lines, with an incidence relation, is a configuration if every pair of distinct points of $\mathcal{C}$ are incident with at most one line of $\mathcal{C}$. By Exercise 3.2 this condition implies its own dual so that any two lines of $\mathcal{C}$ intersect in at most one point of $\mathcal{C}$. We shall say that a configuration $\mathcal{C}$ is closed if it satisfies the definition of Chapter III, that is, every pair of distinct elements of the same type are incident with a common element. A closed configuration is a projective plane if and only if it contains a quadrangle, and it is known (see Exercise 3.1) which closed configurations are not projective planes. Such closed configurations are called degenerate. A configuration $\mathcal{A}$ is called a<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>

sub-configuration of a configuration $B$ if the points and lines of $A$ are all points and lines of $B$ and if, for any point $P$ and line $m$ of $A$, $P$ is on $m$ in $B$ if and only if $P$ is on $m$ in $A$. (This prevents the over-configuration $B$ from changing the incidences between elements already in $A$.) If $A$ is a sub-configuration of $B$ we write $A < B$. A configuration $C$ is called confined if every one of its elements is incident with at least three elements, and $C$ is open if none of its sub-configurations is confined.

Exercise 11.1. Show that a confined configuration has at least seven points and seven lines, and find a confined configuration with exactly seven points and seven lines.

The following is an example of a confined configuration with eight points and eight lines: the points are the symbols 0, 1, ..., 7, and the lines are the point sets $\{0, 1, 2\}, \{5, 6, 7\}, \{0, 6, 3\}, \{5, 1, 4\}, \{1, 7, 3\}, \{6, 2, 4\}, \{0, 7, 4\}, \{5, 2, 3\}$.

Exercise 11.2. Show that the example above is a sub-configuration of $A_2(3)$.

Almost as an immediate consequence of the definitions we have;

Lemma 11.1. Let $\{A_a\}$ be a collection of sub-configurations of a configuration $C$. Then

(i) if the $A_a$ are all open then $\bigcap_a A_a$ is open,

(ii) if the $A_a$ are all confined then $\bigcup_a A_a$ is confined.

Proof. Both claims are easy; for instance, if all the $A_a$ are confined then each element of the union has at least three incidences in some particular $A_a$ and, therefore, certainly has three incidences in $\bigcup_a A_a$.

In view of Lemma 11.1

of $\mathcal{C}$ not in $\mathcal{K}$ must have infinitely many incidences with elements of $\mathcal{K}$; suppose the point $P$ is such an element. If $l, m, n$ are any three lines of $\mathcal{K}$ which contain $P$ then, by the definition of $\mathcal{K}$, each of these lines is contained in a finite confined configuration and, by Lemma 11.1, the union of these three finite confined configuration is, again, finite and confined. Adding $P$ to this union gives a new configuration which is clearly finite and, since the only new element has at least three incidences, confined. But this implies that this new configuration is in $\mathcal{K}$ and therefore, in particular, that $P$ is in $\mathcal{K}$. This contradiction shows that $i$ is finite. Note that in fact we have shown that in an o.f. configuration each element outside of $\mathcal{K}$ has at most two incidences with elements of $\mathcal{K}$.

3. Generation

If $\mathcal{A} < \mathcal{P}$ where $\mathcal{A}$ is a configuration and $\mathcal{P}$ is a closed configuration then the set $\{\mathcal{C}_i\}$ of closed configurations in $\mathcal{P}$ which contain $\mathcal{A}$ is non empty. Thus we define the configuration generated by $\mathcal{A}$ in $\mathcal{P}$, written $\langle \mathcal{A} \rangle_{\mathcal{P}}$ to be the intersection of all the closed sub-configurations of $\mathcal{P}$ which contain $\mathcal{A}$. We shall also call $\langle \mathcal{A} \rangle_{\mathcal{P}}$ the closure of $\mathcal{A}$ in $\mathcal{P}$; if there is no danger of ambiguity we shall omit the "in $\mathcal{P}$" and the subscript and write $\langle \mathcal{A} \rangle$. The terminology suggests that $\langle \mathcal{A} \rangle_{\mathcal{P}}$ is closed; we shall prove that this is so and then examine the way in which $\mathcal{A}$ actually generates $\langle \mathcal{A} \rangle_{\mathcal{P}}$. But first, notice that if $\mathcal{A}$ is

than we say that $C_i$ is a one-step extension of $C$. (If $C$ and $C_i$ are both sub-configurations of a configuration $P$ then we call $C_i$ a one-step extension of $C$ in $P$. However, as will be apparent from the definitions, it is not always necessary to assume the existence of an over-configuration $P$). If $C = C_0 < C_1 < C_2 < \cdots < C_n$ is a sequence of configurations such that each $C_{i+1}$ is a one-step extension of $C_i$, then we say that $C_i$ is an $n$-step extension of $C$. Often we shall merely say that $C_i$ is an extension of $C$. Clearly $C$ is an $n$-step extension of itself for any $n$; to avoid having to worry about this we shall usually be interested in some special types of extensions which we now define. If $C_i$ is a one-step extension of $C$ such that every pair of distinct like elements in $C$ always meet in $C_1$ then we call $C_1$ a full one-step extension of $C$. Full $n$-step extensions are defined in the obvious way. The point of this is that in a full extension we have made sure that everything we could add on has been added; thus, while every configuration is an extension of itself, a configuration is a full extension of itself if and only if it is closed. The next special type of extension is: if $C_i$ is a one-step extension of $C$ such that every element of $C_1$ not in $C$ is incident with exactly two elements of $C_1$ then $C_i$ is a free one-step extension of $C$. Again free $n$-step extensions (or free extensions) are defined accordingly, and a free full extension is the appropriate combination of the two. It is important to note that an arbitrary configuration $C$ in a closed configuration $P$ may have no free extensions in $P$ at all excepting, trivially, $C$ itself. We are now in a position to formalize the intuitive construction for $<\langle C \rangle>_\theta$.

**Theorem 11.3.** If $C$ is a sub-configuration of a

Proof. We shall construct $\mathcal{P}$ so that it will, itself, be $\mathcal{F}(\mathcal{C})$. Let $\mathcal{C} = \mathcal{C}_0$, and define a sequence $\mathcal{C}_i$ of configurations as follows: if $\mathcal{C}_i$ is given, then $\mathcal{C}_{i+1}$ will consist of all the elements of $\mathcal{C}_i$ (with their incidences) and in addition for each pair $X$ and $Y$ of two like elements of $\mathcal{C}_i$ which are not incident with a common element in $\mathcal{C}_i$, we define an element $XY$, which is unlike $X$ and $Y$ and is incident with $X$ and $Y$ only, and is to be in $\mathcal{C}_{i+1}$. It is then easy to see that each $\mathcal{C}_i$ is an $i$-step full free extension of $\mathcal{C}$, and if we let $\mathcal{P} = \bigcup \mathcal{C}_i$, then $\mathcal{P}$ is closed, and $\langle \mathcal{C} \rangle_{\emptyset} = \mathcal{F}(\mathcal{C}) = \mathcal{P}$. The uniqueness of $\mathcal{F}(\mathcal{C})$, up to isomorphism, is easy; we omit the proof.

Note that, as a result of Theorem 11.4, when we are discussing free extensions we may forget the over-configuration in which the extensions are taken.

Suppose $\mathcal{C}$ is contained in the closed configuration $\mathcal{P}$ and let $\mathcal{B} = \langle \mathcal{C} \rangle_{\rho}$, let $X$ be an element of $\mathcal{B}$. Then since $\mathcal{B}$ is the union of full extensions of $\mathcal{C}$, there is an integer $n$ such that $X$ is in the full $n$-step extension $\mathcal{C}_i$ of $\mathcal{C}$, but not in $\mathcal{C}_{i-1}$ (if $X$ is in $\mathcal{C}_i$, then $n = 0$). We define $n$ to be the $\mathcal{C}$-stage of $X$, written $s_{\mathcal{C}}

maximal $\mathcal{B}$-stage $n > 0$ and this element has at most two incidences with elements of lower $\mathcal{B}$-stage; since this element must have at least three incidence in $\mathcal{A}$, it has an incidence with at least one element of $\mathcal{A}$ whose $\mathcal{B}$-stage is greater than $n$, and this contradicts the maximality of $n$.

Corollary. For any configuration $\mathcal{B}$, $\mathcal{K}(\mathcal{F}(\mathcal{B})) = \mathcal{K}(\mathcal{B})$.

Exercise 11.6. Show that there is only one confined configuration with seven points and seven lines, none with seven points and eight lines, and find one with eight points and eight lines.

*Exercise 11.7. Find all confined configurations with nine points and nine lines, and show that there are none with nine points and fewer than nine lines.

Lemma 11.6. Suppose $\mathcal{A}$, $\mathcal{B}$, $\mathcal{C}$ are configurations, $\mathcal{A} < \mathcal{B} < \mathcal{C}$. Then if any two of the three statements below are true, so is the third:

(a) $\mathcal{C}$ is a free extension of $\mathcal{A}$,
(b) $\mathcal{C}$ is a free extension of $\mathcal{B}$,
(c) $\mathcal{B}$ is a free extension of $\mathcal{A}$.

Proof. That (b) and (c) imply (a) is of course trivial.

Suppose (a) and (c) are true. Then if $\mathcal{D}$ is a maximal free extension of $\mathcal{B}$ such that $\mathcal{D} < \mathcal{C}$, we will be done if we can show that $\mathcal{D} = \mathcal{C}$. Suppose $\mathcal{D} \neq \mathcal{C}$ so that the addition of any element of $\mathcal{C}$ not in $\mathcal{D}$ must result in a configuration that is not a free extension of $\mathcal{B}$, hence not of $\mathcal{D}$. Choose an element $X$ in $\mathcal{C}$, not in $\mathcal{D}$, of minimal $\mathcal{A}$-stage, and let $\mathcal{D}_

extension of a finite number of steps. But all three configurations can be themselves infinite.

**Exercise 11.8.** If $\mathcal{B}$ is an extension of $\mathcal{A}$ show that $\mathcal{A}$ is finite if and only if $\mathcal{B}$ is.

The word "free" is crucial in Lemma 11.6. We now give two exercises to show what happens if freeness is not assumed.

**Exercise 11.9.** Show that if the word "free" is deleted in (a), (b), (c) of Lemma 11.6 then (a) and (c) imply (b) and (b) and (c) imply (a).

That (a) and (b) do not imply (c) is shown by the following:

**Exercise 11.10.** Let $\ma