 a binary relation $<$ such that

(a) for all $x, y$, exactly one of $x < y$, $x = y$, $y < x$ holds,
(b) if $x < y$ and $y < z$, then $x < z$,
(c) if $x < y$, then there exists $z$ such that $x < z < y$,
(d) for each $x$, there exist $y, z$ such that $y < x < z$.

Using a binary relation symbol $\ell$, with $\ell(x, y)$ to be thought of as $x < y$, and also $\mathcal{I}$, construct a finite theory $\mathcal{D}$ whose models are precisely the dense linearly ordered sets. Show

that $\alpha$ preserves the relation $r \in \mathcal{R}_t$ if, for all $(m_1, \ldots, m_t) \in M^t$, we have $(m_1, \ldots, m_t) \in \psi r$ if and only if $(\alpha m_1, \ldots, \alpha m_t) \in \psi' r$. We say that $\alpha$ preserves the subset $S$ of $\mathcal{R}$ if it preserves every $r \in S$.

(ii) Show that a bijective map $\alpha: M \rightarrow M'$ is an isomorphism of models if and only if it preserves constants and preserves $\mathcal{R}$.

Let $a_1, \ldots, a_n$ be the elements of $M$, so numbered that $\varphi(C) = \{a_1, \ldots, a_k\}$, and let $c_1, \ldots, c_k \in C$ be such that $\varphi(c_i) = a_i$.

(iii) Show that a bijective map $\alpha$ preserves constants if and only if $\alpha(a_i) = \varphi'(c_i)$ for $i = 1, \ldots, k$.

For $r \in \mathcal{R}_t$ and $(i_1, \ldots, i_t) \in \mathbb{Z}_n^t$, we put

$$q(i_1, \ldots, i_t) = \begin{cases} r(x_{i_1}, \ldots, x_{i_t}) \text{ if } (a_{i_1}, \ldots, a_{i_t}) \in \psi r, \\ \sim r(x_{i_1}, \ldots, x_{i_t}) \text{ if } (a_{i_1}, \ldots, a_{i_t}) \notin \psi r, \end{cases}$$

and

$$r^*(x_1, \ldots, x_n) = \bigwedge_{(i_1, \ldots, i_t)} q(i_1, \ldots, i_t).$$

Write $\text{dist}(x_1, \ldots, x_n)$ for $\sim \mathcal{I}(x_1, x

tions which possibly involve quantifiers. We shall call these "simple" elements of $P(\mathcal{T})$ primary propositions.

**Definition 4.1.** Let $\Pi \subseteq P(\mathcal{T})$. We say that $\mathcal{T}$ admits $\Pi$-reduction of quantifiers if there is a process which assigns to each $p \in P(\mathcal{T})$ an element $q \in P(\mathcal{T})$ such that

(i) $q$ is a propositional combination of elements of $\Pi$,

(ii) $\text{var}(q) \subseteq \text{var}(p)$,

and

(iii) $\mathcal{T} \vdash p \Leftrightarrow q$.

The utility of such a reduction procedure for any investigation depends on the relative simplicity of the elements of $\Pi$ compared to the elements of $P(\mathcal{T})$. Every theory admits the useless reduction given by $\Pi = P(\mathcal{T})$ and $q = p$. We give a more helpful example.

**Example 4.2.** Let $\mathcal{E} = \{ \mathcal{I} \}, \emptyset, \emptyset$ be the theory of equality, with $V = V_0 = \{ x_n | n \in \mathbb{N} \}$. We write $\mathcal{I}(x, y)$ as $x = y$, and $\sim \mathcal{I}(x, y)$ as $x \neq y$. As the set of primary propositions, we take

$$\Pi = \{\text{al}(n) | n \in \mathbb{N} \} \cup \{ x_i = x_j | i, j \in \mathbb{N} \}.$$

We introduce an abbreviation which we shall use in describing the reduction process. For $1 \leqslant r \leqslant s$, put

$$\text{dist}_r(x_1, \ldots, x_s) = \bigvee_{\alpha} \left( \bigwedge_{i < j \leqslant r} (x_{\alpha_i} \neq x_{\alpha_j}) \wedge \bigwedge_{i = r + 1} s \left( \bigvee_{j = 1}^r (x_{\alpha_i

Step 2. We have $p = Q(\forall x)p_1$, where $Q$ consists of a (possibly empty) string of quantifiers and possibly a negation, and $p_1$ is a propositional combination of elements of $\Pi$. If $x \notin \text{var}(p_1)$, replace $p$ by $Qp_1$ and begin again at Step 1. If $x \in \text{var}(p_1)$, express $p_1$ in conjunctive normal form (see Exercise 3.10 of Chapter III):

$$p_1 = a_1 \wedge a_2 \wedge \cdots \wedge a_k,$$

where $a_j = d_{1j} \vee d_{2j} \vee \cdots \vee d_{njj}$, with each $d_{ij}$ either a primary proposition or the negation of a primary proposition.

Step 3. We have $p = Q(\forall x)p_1$, with $p_1 = \bigwedge_{j=1}^{k} \bigvee_{i=1}^{n_j} d_{ij}$, where each $d_{ij}$ is primary or the negation of a primary proposition. For each $j = 1, 2, \ldots, k$, delete $a_j$ from $p_1$ if there is an $i$ such that $d_{ij} = (v = v)$ for some $v \in V$, unless this holds for all $j$, in which case replace $(\forall x)p_1$ by $F \Rightarrow F$ and begin again at Step 1.

Step 4. We have $p = Q(\forall x)p_1$, with $p_1 = \bigwedge_{j=1}^{k} \bigvee_{i=1}^{n_j} d_{ij}$, where $d_{ij}$ is primary or the negation of a primary proposition. For each $j = 1, 2, \ldots, k$, delete from $a_j$ every $d_{ij}$ of the form $(v \neq v)$ with $v \in V$, unless for some $j$ every $d_{ij}$ has this form, in which case

Theorem 4.3. The theory $\mathcal{E} = \{ \mathcal{I} \}, \emptyset, \emptyset$ is decidable.

Proof. Let $p \in \mathcal{L}(\mathcal{E})$. The reduction process described above gives an element $q$, equivalent to $p$, which is a propositional combination of elements of $\Pi$ such that $\text{var}(q) \subseteq \text{var}(p)$. Since $\text{var}(p) = \emptyset$, $q$ is a propositional combination of elements of the form $p_n = \text{al}(n + 1) (n \geqslant 1)$. Hence $q$ is a propositional combination of $p_1, p_2, \ldots, p_k$ for some $k$. Let $f: \mathbb{Z}_2^k \to \mathbb{Z}_2$ be the corresponding truth function. Then $\mathcal{E} \vdash q$ if and only if $f(x_1, \ldots, x_k) = 1$ for all $(x_1, \ldots, x_k) \in \mathbb{Z}_2^k$ such that, for some $n (0 \leqslant n \leqslant k), x_1 = x_2 = \cdots = x_n = 1$ and $x_{n+1} = x_{n+2} = \cdots = x_k = 0$. This is so because these are the only possible combinations of truth values for $p_1, \ldots, p_k$ in models of $\mathcal{E}$.

We note that there is no need for a formal definition of decidability of a first-order theory when one is proving constructively that a particular theory is decidable—the proof is self-sufficient. Formality is required if one is to show the nonexistence of a decision process, as we shall do in Chapter IX. We also remark that the above result, on the decidability of the theory of equality, is not in conflict with the theorem of Kalmar mentioned in Chapter IV and proved in Chapter IX. Although the theory of equality involves a binary predicate symbol, it also includes the axioms of identity.

Exercise 4.4. Show that the theory $\mathcal{

Chapter VI

Zermelo-Fraenkel Set Theory

§1 Introduction

All the ordinary mathematical systems are constructed in terms of sets. If we wish to study the reasoning used in mathematics, our model of mathematics must include some form of set theory, for otherwise our study must be restrictive. For example, Elementary Group Theory formalises almost nothing of group theory. The pervasive role of set theory in mathematics implies that any reasonable model of set theory will in effect contain a model of all of mathematics (including the mathematics of this book).

The informal way in which properties of sets are used in mathematics often means that one is aware of some of the more useful axioms of set theory without necessarily having seen or studied sets as an axiomatic theory. In those parts of mathematics where a careful account of set theory is needed, the axiomatisation usually chosen is the one known as Zermelo-Fraenkel Set Theory. We shall set out the axioms of this theory (which we denote by ZF) with some brief comments on the significance of the various axioms. We shall then see how this theory ZF may be formalised within $\text{Pred}_g(V, \mathcal{R})$. Finally, we shall consider the significance of some of the results of Chapter V for our formalised set theory. The reader interested in a more detailed account of ZF is referred to [4].

§2 The Axioms of ZF

ZF is the study of a single type of object. Objects of this type will be called sets. We shall admit another type of object, called a property of a set, but the objects which make up any set will themselves be sets. Since one customarily forms sets whose members are mathematical or physical objects of diverse types, the requirement that members of sets must themselves be sets may therefore seem restrictive. Experience has shown that with some exceptions (which can be accommodated by an extension of the theory), all the objects used in mathematics can be constructed as sets, while we can avoid the need to form sets of physical objects by assigning mathematical names to the objects and using the set of names.

In ZF, we study a single relationship$^1$ between sets. This relationship is called membership and will be denoted by $\in$. Thus $x \in y$ is read “(the set) $x$

$^1$ We cannot formalise this relationship as a set of pairs, for we

is a member of (the set) $y$, or “$x$ belongs to $y$”. We also study property relationships, which are of the form “the set $x$ has the property $\pi$”.

In the list of axioms of ZF which follows, some are described as axioms, others as axiom schemas. The distinction will be explained when we construct First-Order ZF.

(ZF1) Axiom of Extension. If $a$ and $b$ are sets, and if for all sets $x$ we have $x \in a$ if and only if $x \in b$, then $a = b$.

Thus two sets are equal if and only if they have the same members. We shall write $a \subseteq b$ if $x \in a$ implies $x \in b$.

(ZF2) Axiom Schema of Subsets. For any set $a$ and any property $\pi$, there is a set $b$ such that $x \in b$ if and only if $x \in a$ and has the property $\pi$.

By (ZF1), this set is unique. We denote it by $\{x \in a | x \in \pi\}$. Assuming that at least one set $a$ exists, we can form the set $\varnothing = \{x \in a | x \neq x\}$. Then for all $x$ we have $x \notin \varnothing$. This set $\varnothing$, which is called the empty set, is independent of the choice of the set $a$ used in its construction. By (ZF1), $\{x \in a_1 | x \neq x\} = \{x \in a_2 | x \neq x\}$. It is clear that for all sets $b$, $\varnothing \subseteq b$.

(ZF2) restricts the way in which a property may be used to form a set, and thereby, the Russell paradox is avoided. It used to be assumed that, for any property $\pi$, one could form the set of all objects with that property. Russell considered the property of not being a member of itself. If $b$ is the set of all sets which are not members of themselves, then consideration of whether or not $b$

Although the axioms already given allow the formation of intersections, the formation of unions requires a further axiom.

(ZF4) Axiom of Union. For every set $c$, there exists a set $a$ such that, if $x \in b$ and $b \in c$, then $x \in a$.

We can now form $\cup c = \{x \in a | x \in b\}$ for some $b \in c\}$ where $a$ is as in (ZF4). $\cup c$ is again independent of the particular $a$ used, so we write simply $\cup c = \{x | x \in b\}$ for some $b \in c\}$. For any sets $a$ and $b$, we can form $a \cup b = \cup \{a, b\}$.

Exercise 2.3. Show that the ordered pairs $(a, b)$ for which $a \in b$ do not form a set. (Assume that there is a set $e = \{(a, b)|a \in b\}$ and show that $\cup (\cup e)$ is the set of all sets.)

The formation of ordered pairs is permitted by the axioms so far given, but not the formation of the set of all ordered pairs of members of given sets. The next axiom remedies this deficiency.

(ZF5) Axiom of the Power Set. For each set $a$, there exists a set $b$ such that, if $x \subseteq a$, then $x \in b$.

Using (ZF2), we obtain the existence of the power set of $a$: Pow($a$) = $\{x \in b | x \subseteq a\} = \{x | x \subseteq a\}$, which is clearly independent of the choice of $b$.

(ZF5) allows formation of the cartesian product $a \times b = \{(x, y)|x \in a\}$ and $y \in b\}$. To show this, we need only produce a set $c$ whose members include all the required ordered pairs $(x, y)$. But $(x, y) = \{\{x\}, \{x, y\}\}, \{x\} \subseteq a \cup b

using (ZF2) and some successor set. We use the usual symbols

$$0 = \varnothing,$$
$$1 = 0^+ = \varnothing \cup \{\varnothing\} = \{\varnothing\} = \{0\},$$
$$2 = 1^+ = 1 \cup \{1\} = \{0, 1\},$$
$$3 = 2^+ = \{0, 1\} \cup \{2\} = \{0, 1, 2\},$$

and so on. The set $\omega$ together with the usual operations of addition and multiplication will be denoted by $N$.

Exercises

2.7. The set $n$ is called transitive if $x \in y$ and $y \in n$ imply that $x \in n$. Show that if $n$ is transitive, then so is $n^+$.

2.8. If $s$ is a successor set, show that $\{n \in s | n \text{ is transitive}\}$ is a successor set. For all $n \in \omega$, prove that $n$ is transitive.

2.9. Given that $n = \{x \in \omega | x \subset n\}$ and that $n \in \omega$, show that $n^+ = \{x \in \omega | x \subset n^+\}$. Hence prove for all $n \in \omega$ that

(a) $n = \{x \in \omega | x \subset n\},$
(b) $n \notin n,$
(c) for all $x \in n, n \not\subset x.$

$(a \subset b$ means $a \subset b$ and $a \neq b.)$

2.10. Show that $0, 1, 2, \ldots$ are all different.

(ZF7) Axiom of Choice. For each set $a$, there exists a function $f: \{x \in \text{Pow}(a) | x \neq \varnothing\} \rightarrow a$, such that for every non-empty subset $x$ of $a$, $f(x

has $\pi$. But then $a$ is the first member $a_1$ of some such sequence $a_1 \ni a_2 \ni \cdots$, and clearly $a_2 \in a$ and has $\pi$. Thus there can be no sets with this property.

Exercises

2.11. Show that (ZF9) implies the Axiom of Regularity: For any set $a \neq \varnothing$, there exists $b \in a$ such that $b \cap a = \varnothing$.

2.12. From the Axiom of Regularity, prove that for every set $a$, $a \notin a$.

2.13. Prove that if $a \subseteq a \times a$, then $a = \varnothing$.

§3 First-Order ZF

We formalise ZF as a first-order theory, which we shall denote by $\mathcal{S}$. We take as relation symbols just $\mathcal{I}, \in$, both binary. We shall use no individual constants in our construction. Where axioms are obvious formalisations of the corresponding informal axioms, we set them down without comment. For ease of understanding, we shall write $x \in y$ and $x = y$ rather than the formally correct $\in(x, y)$ and $\mathcal{I}(x, y)$, and the negations of these statements will be written $x \notin y$ and $x \neq y$.

(ZF1) $(\forall a)(\forall b)\bigl(((\forall x)(x \in a \Leftrightarrow x \in b)) \Rightarrow a = b\bigr)$.

In the informal version of (ZF2), we used a property $\pi$ of sets. The informal statement “$x$ has property $\pi$.” becomes for us the predicate $\pi(x)$, where $\pi$ is an element of $P(V, \mathcal{R})$, the notation $\pi(x)$ simply describing the dependence of $\pi$ upon $x$. (The notation $\pi(x)$ does not imply that $\text{var}(\pi(x)) = \{x\}$.) For given $\pi(x)$, (ZF2) becomes

$(\forall a)(\exists b)(\

Exercise 3.1. Some later axioms of $\mathcal{S}$ will have the form $(\forall)(\exists a)(\forall x)(p(x) \Rightarrow x \in a)$ for certain elements $p(x) \in P(V, \mathcal{R})$. Show that $\{(\forall)(\exists a)(\forall x)(p(x) \Rightarrow x \in a)\} \vdash_{\mathcal{S}} (\forall)(\exists a)(\forall x)(p(x) \Leftrightarrow x \in a)$.

We introduce further useful abbreviations. We write $a \subseteq b$ for $(\forall x)(x \in a \Rightarrow x \in b)$, $a = \{x | p(x)\}$ for $(\forall x)(x \in a \Leftrightarrow p(x))$, $a = \{a_1, \ldots, a_n\}$ for $(\forall x)(x \in a \Leftrightarrow (x = a_1 \lor \cdots \lor x = a_n))$, and $c = (a, b)$ for $c = \{\{a\}, \{a, b\}\}$, which itself is an abbreviation whose meaning has been explained. In particular, $a = \emptyset$ is an abbreviation for $(\forall x)(x \notin a)$. We may now write down relatively concise formal versions of four more axioms.

(ZF3) $(\forall a)(\forall b)(\exists c)(a \in c \land b \in c)$.
(ZF4) $(\forall c)(\exists a)(\forall x)((\exists b)(x \in b \land b \in c)) \Rightarrow x \in a)$.
(ZF5) $(\forall a)(\exists b)(\forall x)(x \subseteq a \Rightarrow x \in b)$.
(ZF6) $(\exists a)((\exists b)(b = \emptyset \land b \in a)) \land (\forall x)(x \in a \Rightarrow (3y)(y = x \cup \{x\} \land y \in a)))$

theory is consistent, because any proof of $F$ in $\mathcal{S}$ has an informal equivalent. Since this book (and also much of mathematics) is written in the context of the informal set theory of ordinary mathematics, and since all of this is destroyed if that set theory is inconsistent, we assume the consistency of informal set theory. With this assumption, $\mathcal{S}$ is a consistent theory.

We now observe that the language $\mathcal{L}(\mathcal{S})$ is in fact independent of the choice of the infinite set $V$ of variables used, for if $V_0$ is a countable subset of $V$, and if $p \in P(V, \mathcal{R})$ has $\text{var}(p) = \varnothing$, then $p \in P(V_0, \mathcal{R})$, and the result follows on recalling that there are no individual constants in our construction of $\mathcal{S}$. We may therefore suppose that $V$ is countable. Since $\mathcal{R} = \{I, \in\}$, it follows that $P(V, \mathcal{R})$ is countable and hence that $\mathcal{S}$ is countable. By the Löwenheim-Skolem Theorem, $\mathcal{S}$ has a countable model.

A theorem of ordinary set theory asserts the existence of uncountable sets, and this theorem (with its proof) can be formalised in the theory $\mathcal{S}$. Hence there exists a countable model of a theory which has as a theorem the existence of uncountable sets! The paradox is resolved when we realise that it arises by using the word “set” in two ways. Let us distinguish words used in their ordinary sense from the same words used in the sense of the model by using the adjectives real or model respectively. “$\mathcal{S}$ has a countable model” then becomes “$\mathcal{S}$ has a real countable model”, i.e., there is a real function from the real set of natural numbers onto the underlying set of the model. For this model, every model set is at most real countable. But a model set is model countable only if there is a model function from the model set of natural numbers onto it, and the real function which counts it need not be a model function.

§4 The Peano Axioms

We have seen how the natural numbers may

It is a well-known theorem that these axioms determine the system $N$ to isomorphism, i.e., if sets $A, A'$, with functions $s, s'$ respectively, each satisfy the axioms, then there exists a bijective function $f: A \rightarrow A'$ such that $f(0) = 0'$ and $f(s(a)) = s'(f(a))$ for all $a \in A$. An informal proof of this runs as follows. We define $f(0) = 0'$, and, if $f(a) = a'$, define $f(s(a)) = s'(a')$. Taking $\pi(a)$ to be the property that $f(a)$ is uniquely defined by this rule, $P_5$ then gives the result that $f$ is a function from $A$ to $A'$. Similarly, we obtain a function $g: A' \rightarrow A$. Taking now $\pi(a)$ to be $g(f(a)) = a$, $P_5$ gives the result that $gf$ is the identity. Similarly $fg$ is the identity, and so $f$ is the required isomorphism.

The Peano axioms are easily formalised as a first-order theory $\mathcal{P}$. We take one unary relation symbol $\theta$, with $\theta(x)$ to mean $x = 0$, and one binary relation symbol $s$, with $s(x, y)$ to mean $x$ is the successor of $y$. The axioms then become

$$P_1: (\exists!x)\theta(x).$$
$$P_2: (\forall x)(\exists!y)s(y, x).$$
$$P_3: (\forall x)(\forall y)(\forall z)((s(z, x) \wedge s(z, y)) \Rightarrow x = y).$$
$$P_4: (\forall x)(\forall y)(s(x, y) \Rightarrow \sim \theta(x)).$$
$$P_5: (\forall)(((\exists x)(\theta(x) \wedge \pi(x)) \wedge (\forall y)(\forall z)(\pi(z) \wedge s(y, z) \Rightarrow \pi(y)))) \Right

Hence within $\mathcal{S}$, the Peano axioms as now formulated in fact determine $N$ to isomorphism. The axioms of $\mathcal{S}$, together with the assumptions $\mathcal{P}(N, s, 0)$, still do not determine $N$ to isomorphism in the sense of our metalogic. There are non-isomorphic models of $\mathcal{S}$, and the systems of natural numbers within these models may well be non-isomorphic. Our theorem asserts that models of the natural numbers within a given model of $\mathcal{S}$ are isomorphic. Our informal proof worked because we were working within an assumed set theory.

Exercises

4.1. Rephrase our very informal proof of the uniqueness of the natural numbers more carefully in terms of informal axiomatic set theory. (This may be found in [12].) Note that the function $f$ to be constructed is a subset of $N \times N'$ and must be constructed in a way permitted by the axioms. (The inductive construction of $f$ needs justification.) Set out the steps of the argument in sufficient detail for it to become clear that it can be formalised to give a proof that $\mathcal{P}(N, s, 0) \cup \mathcal{P}(N', s', 0') \vdash_{\mathcal{S}} (N, s, 0) \simeq (N', s', 0')$.

4.2. Addition is usually defined in terms of the successor function by

(i) $x + 0 = x$, and
(ii) $x + s(y) = s(x + y)$.

Assuming the informal Peano axioms, show that (i) and (ii) define a function $+: N \times N \rightarrow N$, and that

(a) $0 + x = x$,
(b) $s(x) + y = s(x + y)$,
(c) $x + y = y + x$,
(d) $(x + y) + z = x + (y + z)$,
(e) $x + y = x + z$ implies $y = z$.

Give a similar definition of multiplication in terms of addition and the successor function, and establish its basic properties.

In the following exercises, $x_i = n$

$M_I = \mathbb{N} \cup (\mathbb{Z} \times I)$, where $I$ is some index set. For $m \in M_I$, $\theta(m)$ is interpreted as true if and only if $m = 0 \in \mathbb{N}$, and $s(m_1, m_2)$ is true if and only if either $m_2 \in \mathbb{N}$ and $m_1 = m_2 + 1$, or $m_2 = (z, i)$, where $z \in \mathbb{Z}$ and $i \in I$, and $m_1 = (z + 1, i)$. Show that $M_I$ is a model of $\mathcal{P}^*$, and that every model of $\mathcal{P}^*$ is isomorphic to $M_I$ for some $I$.

4.4. Prove that every theorem of $\mathcal{P}^*$ is a theorem of $\mathcal{P}$. Hence show that every model of $\mathcal{P}$ is isomorphic to $M_I$ for some $I$.

4.5. Show that $\mathcal{P}^*$ admits $\Pi$-reduction of quantifiers, where

$$\Pi = \{x_i = x_j + n, x_i = n | i, j, n \in \mathbb{N}\}.$$

Hence prove that $\mathcal{P}^*$ is decidable and complete.

4.6. Let $\pi(x_0, x_1, \ldots, x_n) \in P(\mathcal{P}) = P(\mathcal{P}^*)$, and let $a_1, \ldots, a_n \in M_I$. Put

$$X = \{m \in M_I | \pi(m, a_1, \ldots, a_n)\} \text{ is true in } M_I\}.$$

Using the $\Pi$-reduction of quantifiers, show that $X$ is either finite or has finite complement in $M_I$. Hence prove that $M_I$ satisfies the induction axiom scheme $P_5$, and so is a model of $\mathcal{P}$.

4.7. From the completeness of $\mathcal{P}^*$ and the fact that every theorem of $\mathcal{

Chapter VII

Ultraproducts

§1 Ultraproducts

In many branches of mathematics, where one is studying a system of some particular type, it is of interest to find out ways of forming new systems of the given type from known examples. One useful method that can often be applied is based on the cartesian product construction. In this section we investigate this construction in the case where the underlying system is a first-order theory $\mathcal{T} = (\mathcal{R}, A, C)$, and $(M_i, v_i, \psi_i)$ for $i \in I$ is a family of models of $\mathcal{T}$. We therefore investigate the possibility of making $M = \prod_{i \in I} M_i$ into a model of $\mathcal{T}$, independently of the particular nature of $\mathcal{T}$.

An element of $\prod_{i \in I} M_i$ is a function $a: I \rightarrow \bigcup_{i \in I} M_i$ such that $a(i) \in M_i$. We shall when convenient denote $a(i)$ by $a_i$, and call it the $i$-component of $a$. There is now an obvious way to proceed. We define $v: C \rightarrow M$ by putting $v(c)_i = v_i(c)$, and we define $\psi r$, for $r \in \mathcal{R}_n$, by putting $(a^{(1)}, \ldots, a^{(n)}) \in \psi r$ if $(a^{(1)}, \ldots, a^{(n)}) \in \psi_i r$ for all $i \in I$.

This construction gives a model $M$ of $\mathcal{T}$ in some cases. For example, since a cartesian product of groups is a group, the method works for the case of elementary group theory. However, the method does not work in the case of elementary field theory, because a cartesian product of fields is a commutative ring with 1 having non-zero noninvertible elements. (This is easily seen, because all operations are defined componentwise, and hence $a \in M$ has an inverse if and only if each $a_i$ is invertible. Take an $a$ in which some but not all $a_i$ are invertible.) Hence the above construction must be modified if it is to work for all theories $\mathcal{T}$. We shall have

should hold for some $i$ if it is to hold at all, we have

(i) $\varnothing \notin \mathcal{F}$.
If $A \in \mathcal{F}$, then $a$ satisfies $p(x)$ and so must satisfy $p(x) \vee q(x)$, whatever $q(x)$ may be. Thus for any $B \subseteq I$, $A \cup B \in \mathcal{F}$ if $A \in \mathcal{F}$. Hence

(ii) Every subset of $I$ which contains a set of $\mathcal{F}$ belongs to $\mathcal{F}$.
If $A \in \mathcal{F}$ and $B \in \mathcal{F}$, then $a$ satisfies $p(x)$ and $q(x)$ and so must satisfy $p(x) \wedge q(x)$. Thus $A \cap B \in \mathcal{F}$ if $A, B \in \mathcal{F}$. Generalising to finite subfamilies of $\mathcal{F}$, we have

(iii) Every finite intersection of sets of $\mathcal{F}$ belongs to $\mathcal{F}$.
Finally, since $a$ must satisfy exactly one of $p(x)$ or $\sim p(x)$, we have

(iv) For each $A \subseteq I$, exactly one of $A$ and $I - A$ belongs to $\mathcal{F}$.

**Definition 1.1.** A set $\mathcal{F}$ of subsets of $I$ satisfying the conditions (i), (ii) and (iii) above is called a filter on $I$. A filter which satisfies (iv) is called an ultrafilter.

The filters on $I$, being subsets of Pow($I$), are partially ordered by inclusion. The ultrafilters are the maximal elements of the set of filters.

**Examples**

1.2. If $I \neq \varnothing$, $\{I\}$ is a filter on $I$.

1.3. If $k$ is a fixed element of $I$, $F = \{J \subseteq I | k \in J\}$ is an ultrafilter on $I$. (Ultrafilters constructed in this way are called principal ultrafilters.)

1.4. If $I$ is infinite, the complements

If $p = r(x)$, where $r \in \mathcal{R}$, then the result holds by the definition of $\psi r$. If $p = q_1 \Rightarrow q_2$, then $v(p) = 0$ if and only if we have $v(q_1) = 1$ and $v(q_2) = 0$. By induction, this holds precisely when $J_1 = \{i \in I | v_i(q_1) = 1\}$ and $J_2 = \{i \in I | v_i(q_2) = 0\}$ are both in $\mathcal{F}$. Put $J_3 = J_1 \cap J_2$. If $J_3 \in \mathcal{F}$, then $J_1 \in \mathcal{F}$ and $J_2 \in \mathcal{F}$ by condition (ii), while $J_1 \in \mathcal{F}$ and $J_2 \in \mathcal{F}$ imply $J_3 \in \mathcal{F}$ by condition (iii). Thus $v(p) = 0$ if and only if $J_3 = \{i \in I | v_i(p) = 0\} \in \mathcal{F}$. By condition (iv), $v(p) = 1$ if and only if $I - J_3 = \{i \in I | v_i(p) = 1\} \in \mathcal{F}$.

If $p(x) = (\forall y)q(x, y)$, then $a\mathcal{F}$ satisfies $p(x)$ if and only if for every $b\mathcal{F} \in \prod_{i \in I} M_i / \mathcal{F}$, $(a\mathcal{F}, b\mathcal{F})$ satisfies $q(x, y)$. By induction, the latter holds if and only if for all $b\mathcal{F}$, $\{i \in I | (a_i, b_i) \text{ satisfies } q(x, y)\} \in \mathcal{F}$. Let $J = \{i \in I | a_i \text{ satisfies } q(x, y)\}$ since $a_i \text{ satisfies } (\forall y)q(x

We now investigate conditions on a set $S$ of subsets of $I$ for the existence of an ultrafilter $\mathcal{F} \supseteq S$. By an appropriate choice of $S$, we shall be able to ensure that every such ultrafilter is non-principal.

**Definition 2.3.** The set $S$ of subsets of $I$ is said to have the finite intersection property if every finite subset of $S$ has non-empty intersection.

**Lemma 2.4.** Let $S$ be a set of $I$. There exists a filter on $I$ containing $S$ if and only if $S$ has the finite intersection property.

**Proof:** The necessity of the condition is immediate, so we prove its sufficiency. Suppose $S$ has the finite intersection property, and put

$$T = \{ U \subseteq I | U = J_1 \cap \cdots \cap J_n \text{ for some } n \text{ and some } J_1, \ldots, J_n \in S \}.$$

Let

$$\mathcal{F} = \{ F \subseteq I | F \supseteq U \text{ for some } U \in T \}.$$

We prove that $\mathcal{F}$, which clearly contains $S$, is a filter. By the finite intersection property of $S$, $\varnothing \notin T$ and so $\varnothing \notin \mathcal{F}$. Also, condition (ii) for a filter is clearly satisfied by $\mathcal{F}$. Finally, if $F_1, \ldots, F_n \in \mathcal{F}$, then for $i = 1, \ldots, n$, $F_i \supseteq \bigcap_{j=1}^{m_i} J_{ij}$ for some $m_i$ and $J_{i1}, \ldots, J_{im_i} \in S$. Hence

$$\bigcap_{i=1}^{n} F_i \supseteq \bigcap_{i=1}^{n} \bigcap_{j=1}^{m_i} J_{ij},$$

and so belongs to $\mathcal{F}$. Thus condition (iii) is satisfied and $\mathcal{F}$ is a filter.

**Lemma

maximal almost disjoint (MAD) if it is maximal among the AD families. Prove or disprove each of the following:

(a) Given any MAD family $A$, there is a non-principal ultrafilter $F$ such that $A$ and $F$ are disjoint.

(b) Given any non-principal ultrafilter $F$ there is a MAD family $A$ such that $A$ and $F$ are disjoint.

§3 The Existence of an Algebraic Closure

We can now apply the theory of ultraproducts to prove a theorem of considerable importance in algebra.

Theorem 3.1. Let $F$ be a field. Then there exists an algebraic closure of $F$.

Proof: Let $T$ be elementary field theory augmented by the addition of the elements of $F$ to the set of constants, and of all the relations $a_1 + a_2 = a_3$, $b_1 b_2 = b_3$ holding in $F$ to the set of axioms. The models of $T$ are the extension fields of $F$. Put $R = F[x]$, the ring of polynomials over $F$. For each $r \in R$, let $F_r$ be a splitting field of $r$. Put

$$J_r = \{s \in R | r \text{ splits over } F_s\}.$$

Since $r_1 r_2 \cdots r_n \in J_{r_1} \cap J_{r_2} \cap \cdots \cap J_{r_n}$, the set $J = \{J_r | r \in R\}$ has the finite intersection property. By Lemmas 2.4 and 2.5, there exists an ultrafilter $F$ on $R$ containing $J$. Put $F^* = \prod_{r \in R} F_r / F$. Then $F^*$ is a model of $T$ and so is an extension field of $F$.

Let $r = x^n + r_1 x^{n-1} + \cdots + r_n$ be a monic polynomial over $F$. We prove that $r$ splits over $F^*$. We put

$$p = (\exists a_1) \

Exercises

3.3. If $F$ is not algebraically closed, prove that the ultrafilter used in the proof of Theorem 3.1 is not principal.

3.4. In the notation of the proof of Theorem 3.1, show that if $F$ is finite, then $\{s \in R | F_s = F_r\} \notin \mathcal{F}$.

3.5. If $F$ is not algebraically closed, prove that $F^*$ (constructed as above) is not algebraic over $F$. (If $F$ is infinite, show that elements $a_r \in F_r$ can be chosen such that $a_r$ and $a_s$ have the same minimum polynomial only for $r = s$. If $F$ is finite, show that the elements $a_r \in F_r$ can be chosen such that $a_r$ and $a_s$ have the same minimum polynomial only for those $r, s$ for which $F_r = F_s$.)

3.6. $F$ is a field. For all $i \in I$, take $F_i = F$ and form the ultraproduct $K = \prod_{i \in I} F_i / \mathcal{F}$ with respect to the ultrafilter $\mathcal{F}$. Prove that $K$ is a pure transcendental extension of $F$.

§4 Non-trivial Ultrapowers

An ultraproduct $\prod_{i \in I} M_i / \mathcal{F}$ in which $M_i = M$ for all $i \in I$ is called an ultrapower of $M$ and denoted by $M^I / \mathcal{F}$. There is a natural embedding $\theta: M \rightarrow M^I / \mathcal{F}$ of $M$ in $M^I / \mathcal{F}$ given by $\theta(m) = f_m \mathcal{F}$, where $f_m: I \rightarrow M$ is the constant function $f_m(i) = m$ for all $i \in I$. By identifying $m$ with $\theta(m)$, we may regard $M$ as a subset of $M^I / \mathcal{F}$. (Alternatively, we may replace the theory $\mathcal{T}$ by the theory

$Y_{\alpha} = X_{\alpha}$. Then $\{Y_{\beta} | \beta \leqslant \alpha\}$ is a partition of $I$ into $\alpha$ disjoint subsets. Since $Y_{\alpha} = \cap \mathcal{G}$, we have $Y_{\alpha} \notin \mathcal{F}$. Suppose $Y_{\beta} \in \mathcal{F}$ for some $\beta < \alpha$. Then $X_{\beta} - X_{\beta+1} \in \mathcal{F}$. Since also $G_{\beta} \in \mathcal{F}$, we have $(X_{\beta} - X_{\beta+1}) \cap G_{\beta} \in \mathcal{F}$. But $(X_{\beta} - X_{\beta+1}) \cap G_{\beta} = \emptyset \notin \mathcal{F}$.

**Lemma 4.5.** Let $\mathcal{F}$ be an $\alpha$-complete ultrafilter on $I$. Then for every partition of $I$ into a set $\mathcal{G}$ of $\alpha$ disjoint subsets, some member of $\mathcal{G}$ is in $\mathcal{F}$.

**Exercise 4.6.** Prove Lemma 4.5.

**Theorem 4.7.** Let $\mathcal{F}$ be an ultrafilter on $I$ and let $\alpha = |M|$. Then $M = M^I / \mathcal{F}$ if and only if $\mathcal{F}$ is $\alpha$-complete.

**Proof:** Suppose $\mathcal{F}$ is $\alpha$-complete. An element of $M^I / \mathcal{F}$ is $f\mathcal{F}$ for some $f: I \rightarrow M$. For each $m \in M$, put $J_m = \{i \in I | f(i) = m\}$. Then $\{J_m | m \in M\}$ is a partition of $I$ into $\alpha$ disjoint subsets. By Lemma 4.6, $J_m \in \mathcal{F}$ for some $m \in M$. This implies $f\mathcal{F} = m$.

Suppose now that $\mathcal{F}$ is $\alpha$-incomplete. Then $\alpha$ must be infinite, and so

categorical, and the same is true for the theories of the other standard systems $Z$, $Q$, $R$ and $C$. We use ultrapowers to produce models of these theories which are not isomorphic to their standard models. We take the set $N$ as index set $I$. Let $F$ be a non-principal ultrafilter on $I$. Since $F$ contains no finite sets, every subset of $I$ with finite complement is in $F$ (i.e., $F$ is an extension of the Fréchet filter on $I$). Trivially, $F$ is $\omega$-incomplete. By Theorem 4.7, if $M$ is any of $N$, $Z$, $Q$, $R$ or $C$, then $M^I/F \neq M$.

An element of $N^I$ is just a sequence of natural numbers. When we form $N^I/F$, we are, among other things, identifying sequences which are the same from some point onwards. Consider the element $uF$ of $N^I/F$ given by the function $u: N \rightarrow N$ defined by $u(i) = i$. This element $uF$ is infinite, in the sense that $uF > n$ for all $n \in N$. To see this, let $k_n: N \rightarrow N$ be the constant function $k_n(i) = n$ for all $i \in N$. Then $n = k_nF$ and $\{i \in N | u(i) > k_n(i)\} = \{i \in N | i > n\} \in F$. Hence by Theorem 1.6, $uF > k_nF$. Similarly, we can show that $Q^I/F$ has infinitesimal elements. For if $v: N \rightarrow Q$ is defined by $v(i) = 1/i$ for $i > 0$, $v(0) = 1$, then $k_0F < vF < k_rF$ for all $r \in Q$ such that $r > 0$. We clearly have natural inclusions $N^I/F \subseteq Z^I/F \subseteq Q^I/F \subseteq R^I/F \subseteq C^

satisfy $q(x, y)$, but we can no longer conclude from this that there exists a function $b \in S$ such that for all $i \in I - J$, $(a_i, b_i)$ does not satisfy $q(x, y)$. If $S$ is chosen so that these functions always exist, then the assertions of Theorem 1.6 will continue to hold for $S/\mathcal{F}$. The next theorem shows how to achieve this. The reader is asked to recall Definition 2.11 of Chapter V.

**Theorem 5.3.** Let $\mathcal{T}$ be the theory of $\mathbb{N}$. Let $S$ be the set of all functions $s: \mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{N}$ which are definable in $\mathcal{T}$. Let $\mathcal{F}$ be an ultrafilter on $\mathbb{N}$. Then the subultraproduct $S/\mathcal{F}$ is a countable model of $\mathcal{T}$. If $\mathcal{F}$ is not principal, then $S/\mathcal{F} \neq \mathbb{N}$.

**Proof:** To show that $S/\mathcal{F}$ is a model of $\mathcal{T}$, it remains for us to show that if $a \in S$ and $J = \{i \in \mathbb{N} | a_i \text{ satisfies } (\forall y) q(x, y)\} \notin \mathcal{F}$, then there exists $b \in S$ such that, for all $i \in \mathbb{N} - J$, we have that $(a_i, b_i)$ does not satisfy $q(x, y)$. We put

$$b_i = 0 \text{ if } a_i \text{ satisfies } (\forall y) q(x, y),$$

$$b_i = \text{the least } n \text{ for which } (a_i, n) \text{ does not satisfy } q(x, y)$$

if $a_i$ does not satisfy $(\forall y) q(x, y)$.

Since $a$ is a definable function, so is $b$, and the assertion follows. Since $P$ is countable, so is $S$ and hence so is $S/\mathcal{F}$. The function $u

Let $\mathcal{T} = (\mathcal{R}, A, C)$ be a theory. We associate with $\mathcal{T}$ the category $\text{Mod}(\mathcal{T})$, whose objects are the models of $\mathcal{T}$ and whose morphisms are the maps $f: M \rightarrow M'$ between models $(M, v, \psi)$ and $(M', v', \psi')$, such that $fv(c) = v'(c)$ for all $c \in C$, and such that $(f(m_1), \ldots, f(m_n)) \in \psi'r$ for all $r \in \mathcal{R}_n$ and $(m_1, \ldots, m_n) \in \psi r$. As an aid to the study of $\text{Mod}(\mathcal{T})$, we use the theory $\mathcal{T}_{\emptyset} = (\mathcal{R}, \emptyset, C)$ and its associated category $\text{Mod}(\mathcal{T}_{\emptyset})$. Every object of $\text{Mod}(\mathcal{T})$ is an object of $\text{Mod}(\mathcal{T}_{\emptyset})$, and the morphisms in $\text{Mod}(\mathcal{T})$ between any two of its objects are precisely the morphisms between them in $\text{Mod}(\mathcal{T}_{\emptyset})$.

Exercise 6.2. $R$ is a ring and $\mathcal{T}$ is the elementary theory of $R$-modules. Show that the category of $R$-modules is precisely the category $\text{Mod}(\mathcal{T})$.

Lemma 6.3. For any theory $\mathcal{T}$, direct limits exist in $\text{Mod}(\mathcal{T}_{\emptyset})$.

Proof: Let $\{M_i, f_j^i|i, j \in I, i \leqslant j\}$ be a direct family in $\text{Mod}(\mathcal{T}_{\emptyset})$. We construct a limit as a subultraproduct. Put $F_i = \{j \in I | j \geqslant i\}$, and let $\mathcal{F}$ be any ultrafilter containing all the $F_i$. (Actually, we do not need $\mathcal{F}$ to be an ultrafilter—any filter containing the $F_i$ will do.) Put

$$S = \

Proof: If $S/\mathcal{F}$ is a model of $\mathcal{T}$, then it is clearly a limit in $\text{Mod}(\mathcal{T})$ of the given family. If $L$ is a limit in $\text{Mod}(\mathcal{T})$ of the family, then $L$ is also a limit in $\text{Mod}(\mathcal{T}_{\emptyset})$, and so is isomorphic to $S/\mathcal{F}$. Thus $S/\mathcal{F}$ is a model of $\mathcal{T}$.

We now investigate conditions on $\mathcal{T}$ for $S/\mathcal{F}$ to be a model of $\mathcal{T}$.

Definition 6.5. An element $p \in P(V, \mathcal{R})$ is called universal if it has the form $(\forall y_1) \cdots (\forall y_s) q(x_1, \ldots, x_r, y_1, \ldots, y_s)$, where $q(x_1, \ldots, x_r, y_1, \ldots, y_s)$ contains no quantifiers.

The argument used in proving Theorem 1.6 shows that the element $s\mathcal{F}$ will satisfy $p(x) = (\forall y) q(x, y)$, where $q(x, y)$ contains no quantifiers, if $\{i \in I | s_i \text{ satisfies } p(x)\} \in \mathcal{F}$. (This includes the case where $x, y$ are $n$-tuples.) Thus every axiom of $\mathcal{T}$ which is universal is satisfied in $S/\mathcal{F}$.

Definition 6.6. A theory $\mathcal{T}$ is called algebraic if every axiom of $\mathcal{T}$ is either universal or has the form

$(\forall x_1) \cdots (\forall x_r)(\exists y_1) \cdots (\exists y_s) p(x_1, \ldots, x_r, y_1, \ldots, y_s, c_1, \ldots, c_t)$,

where $c_i \in C$ and $p$ is constructed from primitive elements of $P(V, \mathcal{R})$ by using $\vee$, $\wedge$ only. The category $\text{Mod}(\mathcal{T

6.10. Show that the conditions we have imposed on the existential axioms cannot be weakened either by (a) allowing the negation of a primitive relation, or (b) allowing an existential quantifier to precede a universal quantifier. (Take the direct family, indexed by $N$, of the sets $\{0, 1, \ldots, n\}$ and inclusion maps, (a) with property $p(x)$ true in $\{0, 1, \ldots, n\}$ for $0, 1, \ldots, n - 1$, (b) with relation $\leqslant$ and axiom $(\exists x)(\forall y)(y \leqslant x).$)

6.11. Show that compact topological spaces and continuous maps do not form an algebraic category.<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>

Chapter VIII
Non-Standard Models

§1 Elementary Standard Systems

Much of mathematics is concerned with the study of "standard" mathematical systems such as the natural numbers, the rationals, the real numbers and the complex numbers, each of which is regarded as a unique system. When we attempt to study one of these systems by axiomatising it within the first-order predicate calculus, we find that our axiomatisation cannot be categorical, and that there exist models of our axiomatic theory not isomorphic to the system we wish to study. Such models have been constructed as ultrapowers in Chapter VII. In this chapter, we investigate ways of exploiting such models in the study of a standard system. We begin by considering elementary systems, i.e., systems in which relations between elements, but not properties of subsets, can be studied.

Definition 1.1. An elementary standard system $S$ is a set $S$ together with a subset $R$ of the set of relations on $S$ such that $I \in R$.

$R$ is the set of relations on $S$ considered to be of interest. It is usual to denote the underlying set $S$ of $S$ by the same symbol $S$, and we shall do so.

Example 1.2. The elementary real number system $R$ consists of the set $R$ of real numbers together with the set $R = \{I, +, \times, <\}$ of relations on $R$. Here, $+$ is the ternary relation $(a, b, c) \in +$ if and only if $a + b = c$, and $\times$ is defined similarly.

Let $S = (S, R)$ be an elementary standard system. We take a set $V \supset S$, such that $V - S$ is countably infinite, and form the first-order algebra $P(S) = P(V, R)$. In this algebra, we think of elements of $S$ and $R$ as names for themselves$^1$.

Definition 1.3. The language of $S$ is the subset $L(S) = \{p \in P(V, R) | \text{var}(p) \subseteq S\}$ of $P(V, R)$.

Interpreting each element of $S$ and $R$ as itself assigns a truth

$\mathcal{T}(\mathbb{S})$ is a complete theory with $\mathbb{S}$ as a model. The theorems of this theory are its axioms, and consist of all elements of $\mathcal{L}(\mathbb{S})$ which are true in $\mathbb{S}$ or in any other model of $\mathcal{T}(\mathbb{S})$. If the axiom set $A$ were fully known, then $\mathcal{T}(\mathbb{S})$ could give us no new information about $\mathbb{S}$. However, our knowledge of $\mathbb{S}$ is usually incomplete, and any method which extends our knowledge of $A$ in fact extends our knowledge of $\mathbb{S}$. If we can choose a model $*\mathbb{S}$ of $\mathcal{T}(\mathbb{S})$ such that the truth or falsity of certain statements $p \in \mathcal{L}(\mathbb{S})$ is more easily determined (by argument in the meta-language) for $*\mathbb{S}$ than for $\mathbb{S}$, then we have a method of utilising $\mathcal{T}(\mathbb{S})$ to discover properties of $\mathbb{S}$. Our aim is to construct some useful models $*\mathbb{S}$.

Exercise 1.5. It is assumed above that the theory with relation symbols $\mathcal{R}$ and axioms $A$ has $\mathbb{S}$ as its set of constants. Prove this.

Definition 1.6. Let $*\mathbb{S}$ be any model of $\mathcal{T}(\mathbb{S})$. We say that $*\mathbb{S}$ is a standard model of $\mathcal{T}(\mathbb{S})$ if $*\mathbb{S}$ is isomorphic to $\mathbb{S}$, and otherwise $*\mathbb{S}$ is called a non-standard model of $\mathcal{T}(\mathbb{S})$.

Let $*\mathbb{S} = (*\mathbb{S}, \varphi, \psi)$ be any model of $\mathcal{T}(\mathbb{S})$. Then $\varphi: \mathbb{S} \rightarrow *\mathbb{S}$ embeds $\mathbb{S}$ in $*\mathbb{S}$, since if $a, b$ are distinct elements of $\mathbb{S}$, then $(a \neq b) \in A$ and so is true in $*\mathbb{S

we wish omit $\rho$ from the set of relation symbols. Among the unary relations on $S$, there is $S$ itself, and those elements of the extended system $\mathcal{O}^{\infty}(S)$ which belong to $S$ are distinguished as those for which the formal statement $\in^1(S, a)$ is true. The statement that $\rho \in \mathcal{O}^1(S)$ is an $n$-ary relation on $S$ can be formalised as

$$\tau_n(\rho) = (\exists x_1) \cdots (\exists x_n) (\in^1(S, x_1) \wedge \cdots \wedge \in^1(S, x_n) \wedge \in^n(\rho, x_1, \ldots, x_n)).$$

while the statement that $\rho$ is an $n$-ary relation on the subsets $S_1, \ldots, S_n$ of $S$ can be formalised as

$$\tau_n(\rho, S_1, \ldots, S_n) = \tau_n(\rho) \wedge (\forall x_1) \cdots (\forall x_n) (\in^n(\rho, x_1, \ldots, x_n) \Rightarrow \in^1(S_1, x_1) \wedge \cdots \wedge \in^1(S_n, x_n)).$$

We can now handle second-order concepts on a standard system $S$ by forming $\mathcal{T}(\mathcal{O}^1(S))$, where the set of relation symbols includes the symbols $\in^n$ and those required for the properties of relations we wish to study. The statement that all $n$-ary relations have the property $\pi$ can then be formalised as $(\forall x)(\tau_n(x) \Rightarrow \pi(x))$.

This process may be applied to still higher-order concepts. $(k + 1)$th-order objects can be studied in $\mathcal{T}(\mathcal{O}^k(S))$, which we call the $(k + 1)$th-order theory of $S$. We call $\mathcal{O}^k(S)$, together with an appropriate set of relation symbols, a $(k + 1)$th-order standard (mathematical) system, and $\mathcal{O}^{\infty}(S)$ an

Example 3.2. We consider the (elementary) real number system $R$. In $R$, $<$ is a concurrent relation with domain $D_{<} = R$. For any finite set $\{x_1, \ldots, x_n\}$ of real numbers, $y = 1 + \max_i(x_i)$ satisfies $x_i < y$ for $i = 1, \ldots, n$.

Now let $\sigma$ be any set of concurrent relations of the standard system $S$. For each $\rho \in \sigma$, we take a new variable $c_\rho \notin V$ and form $V^\sigma = V \cup \{c_\rho | \rho \in \sigma\}$, $P^\sigma = P(V^\sigma, R)$. We put

$$A_\sigma = \{ \rho(x, c_\rho) | \rho \in \sigma \text{ and } x \in D_\rho \}.$$

Definition 3.3. The enlargement of $\mathcal{T} = (\mathcal{R}, A, S)$ with respect to $\sigma$ is the theory $\mathcal{T}^\sigma = (\mathcal{R}, A \cup A_\sigma, S \cup \{c_\rho | \rho \in \sigma\})$. When $\sigma$ is the set of all concurrent relations of $S$, we call $\mathcal{T}^\sigma$ the full enlargement of $\mathcal{T}$, and denote it by $*\mathcal{T}$.

Theorem 3.4. Let $\mathcal{T} = \mathcal{T}(S)$ and let $\sigma$ be any set of concurrent relations of $S$. Then $\mathcal{T}^\sigma$ is consistent.

Proof. Suppose $\mathcal{T}^\sigma \vdash F$. Then $A_0 \vdash_{\mathcal{T}} F$ for some finite subset $A_0$ of $A_\sigma$. Let $A_0 = \{ \rho_j(x_{ij}, c_\rho_j) | i = 1, \ldots, r_j; j = 1, \ldots, n \}$, where $x_{ij} \in D_\rho_j$. Since $\{x_{1j}, \ldots, x_{rjj}\}$ is a finite subset of $D_\rho_j$, there exists $b

Examples

3.7. For any $S$, $S \leqslant \mathcal{O}^1(S) \leqslant \mathcal{O}^2(S) \leqslant \cdots \leqslant \mathcal{O}^{\infty}(S)$.

3.8. Take $R = (\mathbb{R}, \{I, +, \times, <, i\})$, where $i(x)$ is interpreted as “$x$ is an integer”. Then $Z = (\mathbb{Z}, \{I, +, \times, <\})$ is a subsystem of $R$.

3.9. $\mathcal{O}^k(Z) \leqslant \mathcal{O}^{k+1}(R)$ for all $k \geqslant 0$.

Let $S \leqslant S_1$, and let $\rho(x, y)$ be a concurrent relation of $S$. Since $S$ is definable, the relation $\rho$ on $S$ can be defined in $P(S_1)$ by

$$\rho_1(x, y) = (x \in S) \wedge (y \in S) \wedge \rho(x, y).$$

This $\rho_1$ is a concurrent relation on $S_1$, consisting of precisely those pairs of elements which are in $\rho$. In general, if $\sigma, \sigma_1$ are sets of concurrent relations of $S$, $S_1$ respectively, we say $\sigma \leqslant \sigma_1$ if, for every $\rho \in \sigma$, we have that the corresponding $\rho_1 \in \sigma_1$.

Theorem 3.10. Let $S \leqslant S_1$, and let $\sigma, \sigma_1$ be sets of concurrent relations of $S$, $S_1$ such that $\sigma \leqslant \sigma_1$. Let $S_1^{\sigma_1}$ be an enlargement of $S_1$ with respect to $\sigma_1$. Then $S_1^{\sigma_1}$ contains an enlargement $S^\sigma$ of $S$ with respect to $\sigma$. In particular, any full enlargement of $S_1$ contains a full enlargement of $S$.

Proof. Put $S^\sigma =

Proof. Suppose that $u = \{u_1, \ldots, u_n\}$ is finite. Then

$$u(x) = (x = u_1) \vee (x = u_2) \vee \cdots \vee (x = u_n)$$

is a description of $u$, and

$$*u = \{a \in *S \mid (a = u_1) \vee (a = u_2) \vee \cdots \vee (a = u_n)\} = u.$$

Suppose that $u$ is infinite. Let $\rho$ be the binary relation on $S$ defined by $\rho(x, y) = (x \in u) \wedge (y \in u) \wedge (x \neq y)$. Then $D_\rho = u$ and, since $u$ is infinite, for any $u_1, \ldots, u_n \in D_\rho$, there exists $y \in u$ distinct from $u_1, \ldots, u_n$ and thus satisfying $\rho(u_i, y)$ for all $i$. Therefore $\rho$ is a concurrent relation, and so there is a $b_\rho \in *S$ such that $\rho(x, b_\rho)$ is true for all $x \in D_\rho$. This says that $b_\rho \in *u$ and $b_\rho \notin u$.

Corollary 4.5. Suppose the enlargement $\mathcal{T}^\sigma$ of $\mathcal{T}(S)$ is both full and trivial. Then $S$ is finite.

Proof. $S$ is a definable subset with description $p(x) = \sim F.$

Corollary 4.6. Let $\rho$ be a definable $n$-ary relation on $S$. Then $*\rho = \rho$ if and only if $\rho$ is finite.

Proof. If $\rho$ is finite, we can give a description which lists its members and it follows that $*\rho = \rho$. If $\rho$ is infinite, put

$$u_i(x) = (\exists x_1) \cdots (\exists x_{i-1})(\exists x_{i+1}) \cdots (\exists x_n

Definition 5.1. An internal first-order $n$-ary relation on $S^\sigma$ is an element of $(\mathcal{R}_n^{(1)})^\sigma$. A relation on $S^\sigma$ which is not internal is called external.

Higher-order internal $n$-ary relations may be defined similarly, by using the set $\mathcal{R}_n^{(k)}$ of $n$-ary relations on $\mathcal{O}^{k-1}(S)$.

If $\rho \in \mathcal{R}_n^{(1)}$ is in fact a definable relation on $S$, we have that

$$\mathcal{T}(\mathcal{O}^1(S)) \vdash (\forall x_1) \cdots (\forall x_n) (\in^n(\rho, x_1, \ldots, x_n) \Rightarrow \rho(x_1, \ldots, x_n))$$

while each $u \in (\mathcal{R}_n^{(1)})^\sigma$ is the relation

$$u = \{(a_1, \ldots, a_n) \in (\mathcal{O}^1(S))^\sigma | \in^n(u, a_1, \ldots, a_n) \text{ is true in } (\mathcal{O}^1(S))^\sigma\}.$$

It follows that the definable relation $\rho$, considered as an element of $(\mathcal{R}_n^{(1)})^\sigma$, is the relation $\rho^\sigma$ on $S^\sigma$. Hence every standard relation is internal. The converse is not true, for if $S$ is infinite, then $\mathcal{R}_n^{(1)}$ is infinite, and by Theorem 4.4, $*(\mathcal{R}_n^{(1)}) \neq \mathcal{R}_n^{(1)}$.

Lemma 5.2. Let $u, v$ be internal $n$-ary relations on $S^\sigma$. Then $u \cap v, u \cup v$, and the complement $u \sim$ of $u$ are also internal.

Proof. We have that

$$\mathcal{T}(\mathcal{O}^1(S)) \vdash (\forall x)(\forall y) ((x \in \mathcal{R}_n^{(1)}) \wedge (y \in \mathcal{R}_n^{(1

The archimedean axiom can indeed be expressed in the language of $O^k(\mathbb{R})$ as

$(\forall x)(\forall y)((x \in \mathbb{R}) \land (y \in \mathbb{R}) \land (x > 0) \Rightarrow (\exists n)((n \in \mathbb{N}) \land (nx > y)))$,

where $nx > y$ is an abbreviation for $(\forall z)(\times (n, x, z) \Rightarrow (z > y))$. This is a theorem of $\mathcal{T}(O^k(\mathbb{R}))$ and so holds in $*\mathbb{R}$. It does not assert the archimedean property for $*\mathbb{R}$, as it asserts that if $x, y \in *\mathbb{R}$ and if $x > 0$, then there is $n \in *\mathbb{N}$ such that $nx > y$. For $*\mathbb{R}$ to be archimedean, we need to have $n \in \mathbb{N}$.

**Definition 6.2.** An element $a \in *\mathbb{R}$ is called finite if there exists a standard real number $b$ such that $|a| < b$. Otherwise, $a$ is called infinite. A (finite) element $a$ is called infinitesimal if $|a| < b$ for all standard real numbers $b > 0$.

0 is infinitesimal, and since $0 < a < b$ holds if and only if $0 < 1/b < 1/a$, it follows that if $a \neq 0$, then $a$ is infinitesimal if and only if $1/a$ is infinite.

The proof of Theorem 6.1 contains a proof of the existence of infinite real numbers, and it follows that infinite natural numbers also exist.

**Lemma 6.3.** There is no smallest infinite natural number. The set of infinite natural numbers is an external set.

**Proof.** If $n$ is a natural number and $n \neq 0$, then $n = m + 1$ for some natural number $m$, since this result is a theorem of $\mathcal{T}(\mathbb{N})$. If $n$ is the

and has no greatest member. It is a theorem of $\mathcal{T}(\mathcal{O}^1(\mathbb{R}))$ that if $u$ is a non-empty subset of $\mathbb{R}$ which is bounded above and has no greatest element, then $\{x \in \mathbb{R} | x > y \text{ for all } y \in u\}$ has a least element. If $R_1$ is internal, then $v = \{x \in \ast \mathbb{R} | x > r \text{ for all } r \in R_1\}$ has a least element. But if $x \in v$, then $\frac{1}{2}x \in v$ and $\frac{1}{2}x < x$. Hence $v$ has no least element, and so $R_1$ is external.

Let $a, b \in \ast \mathbb{R}$. We write $a \cong b$ if $a - b$ is infinitesimal. $\cong$ is clearly an equivalence relation on $\ast \mathbb{R}$.

Exercise 6.6. Show that if $r \in \ast \mathbb{R}$, then there exists $q \in \ast \mathbb{Q}$ such that $q \cong r$.

Definition 6.7. The monad of the finite real number $a$ is the set $\mu(a) = \{r \in \ast \mathbb{R} | r \cong a\}$.

Theorem 6.8. If $a$ is a finite real number, then $\mu(a)$ contains exactly one standard real number. If $R_0$ is the set of finite real numbers and $R_1$ the set of infinitesimal real numbers, then $R_0$ is a ring, $R_1$ is an ideal of $R_0$ and $R_0/R_1$ is isomorphic to $\mathbb{R}$.

Proof. If $r, s \in \mu(a)$ and $r, s$ are standard, then $|r - s|$ is an infinitesimal standard real number. Thus $|r - s| = 0$ and $r = s$. We have to show that there is a standard real number in $\mu(a)$. This is so if $a$ is standard, so

$\mathcal{T}(\mathcal{O}^1(\mathbb{R}))$. Therefore $(\forall n)((n \in *\mathbb{N}) \land (n > n_0) \Rightarrow |*s(n) - r| < \varepsilon)$ holds in $*(\mathcal{O}^1(\mathbb{R}))$. If $n$ is an infinite natural number, then $|*s(n) - r| < \varepsilon$, and this is true for all standard real numbers $\varepsilon > 0$. Hence $*s(n) \in \mu(r)$ for all infinite numbers $n$.

Suppose conversely that $*s(n) \in \mu(r)$ for all infinite natural numbers $n$. If $n_0$ is an infinite natural number, then for every standard real number $\varepsilon > 0$, we have $|*s(n) - r| < \varepsilon$ for all $n > n_0$. Thus $(\exists n_0)((n_0 \in *\mathbb{N}) \land (\forall n)((n \in *\mathbb{N}) \land (n > n_0) \Rightarrow |*s(n) - r| < \varepsilon))$, being true in $*\mathcal{O}^1(\mathbb{R})$, is a theorem of $\mathcal{T}(\mathcal{O}^1(\mathbb{R}))$. Hence there exists $n_0 \in \mathbb{R}$ such that $|s(n) - r| < \varepsilon$ for all $n > n_0$.

By a similar argument, one obtains the following result.

**Theorem 6.10.** Let $U$ be a subset of $\mathbb{R}$, and suppose $U$ contains a neighbourhood of $a \in \mathbb{R}$. Let $f: U \to \mathbb{R}$ be a function defined on $U$. If $\ell \in \mathbb{R}$, then $\lim_{x \to a} f(x) = \ell$ if and only if $*f(x) \in \mu(\ell)$ for all $x \neq a$ in $\mu(a)$.

**Corollary 6.11.** The function $f$ is continuous at $a$ if and only if $*f(x) \neq *f(a)$ for all

Consequently $*f(x) \rightleftharpoons *f(r) \rightleftharpoons *f(y)$, and we have the condition for uniform continuity on $U$.

Exercise 6.15. Where does the above method of proof fail if $U$ is taken as the open interval $\{x : p < x < q\}$?

Our final application is to the study of sequences of real-valued functions $s_n(x)$ defined on a subset $U$ of $\mathbb{R}$. The usual necessary and sufficient condition that $s_n(x) \rightarrow r(x)$ on $U$ as $n \rightarrow \infty$, when expressed in terms of our non-standard analysis, is that for each $x \in U$ and for all infinite $n$, $*s_n(x) \rightleftharpoons *r(x)$. Again, the meaning of the condition is altered if we express it in terms of $(\forall x)$, as the next result indicates.

Theorem 6.16. The sequence of functions $s_n(x)$ converges uniformly on $U$ to $r(x)$ if and only if for all $x \in *U$ and for all infinite $n$, $*s_n(x) \rightleftharpoons *r(x)$.

Exercise 6.17. Prove Theorem 6.16 by suitably modifying the argument leading to Theorem 6.13.

Theorem 6.18. Suppose the functions $s_n(x)$ are continuous on $U$, and converge uniformly on $U$ to $r(x)$. Then $r(x)$ is continuous on $U$.

Proof. Let $a \in U$. If $x \in *U$ and $x \rightleftharpoons a$, and if $n$ is infinite, then by Corollary 6.11 and Theorem 6.14,

$$*r(s) \rightleftharpoons *s_n(x) \rightleftharpoons *s_n(a) \rightleftharpoons *r(a),$$

showing that $r$ is continuous at $a$.

Exercises

6.19. Given that $f(x) \rightarrow r$ and $g(x) \