tesimal if $|a| < b$ for all standard real numbers $b > 0$.

0 is infinitesimal, and since $0 < a < b$ holds if and only if $0 < 1/b < 1/a$, it follows that if $a \neq 0$, then $a$ is infinitesimal if and only if $1/a$ is infinite.

The proof of Theorem 6.1 contains a proof of the existence of infinite real numbers, and it follows that infinite natural numbers also exist.

**Lemma 6.3.** There is no smallest infinite natural number. The set of infinite natural numbers is an external set.

**Proof.** If $n$ is a natural number and $n \neq 0$, then $n = m + 1$ for some natural number $m$, since this result is a theorem of $\mathcal{T}(\mathbb{N})$. If $n$ is the

and has no greatest member. It is a theorem of $\mathcal{T}(\mathcal{O}^1(\mathbb{R}))$ that if $u$ is a non-empty subset of $\mathbb{R}$ which is bounded above and has no greatest element, then $\{x \in \mathbb{R} | x > y \text{ for all } y \in u\}$ has a least element. If $R_1$ is internal, then $v = \{x \in \ast \mathbb{R} | x > r \text{ for all } r \in R_1\}$ has a least element. But if $x \in v$, then $\frac{1}{2}x \in v$ and $\frac{1}{2}x < x$. Hence $v$ has no least element, and so $R_1$ is external.

Let $a, b \in \ast \mathbb{R}$. We write $a \cong b$ if $a - b$ is infinitesimal. $\cong$ is clearly an equivalence relation on $\ast \mathbb{R}$.

Exercise 6.6. Show that if $r \in \ast \mathbb{R}$, then there exists $q \in \ast \mathbb{Q}$ such that $q \cong r$.

Definition 6.7. The monad of the finite real number $a$ is the set $\mu(a) = \{r \in \ast \mathbb{R} | r \cong a\}$.

Theorem 6.8. If $a$ is a finite real number, then $\mu(a)$ contains exactly one standard real number. If $R_0$ is the set of finite real numbers and $R_1$ the set of infinitesimal real numbers, then $R_0$ is a ring, $R_1$ is an ideal of $R_0$ and $R_0/R_1$ is isomorphic to $\mathbb{R}$.

Proof. If $r, s \in \mu(a)$ and $r, s$ are standard, then $|r - s|$ is an infinitesimal standard real number. Thus $|r - s| = 0$ and $r = s$. We have to show that there is a standard real number in $\mu(a)$. This is so if $a$ is standard, so

$\mathcal{T}(\mathcal{O}^1(\mathbb{R}))$. Therefore $(\forall n)((n \in *\mathbb{N}) \land (n > n_0) \Rightarrow |*s(n) - r| < \varepsilon)$ holds in $*(\mathcal{O}^1(\mathbb{R}))$. If $n$ is an infinite natural number, then $|*s(n) - r| < \varepsilon$, and this is true for all standard real numbers $\varepsilon > 0$. Hence $*s(n) \in \mu(r)$ for all infinite numbers $n$.

Suppose conversely that $*s(n) \in \mu(r)$ for all infinite natural numbers $n$. If $n_0$ is an infinite natural number, then for every standard real number $\varepsilon > 0$, we have $|*s(n) - r| < \varepsilon$ for all $n > n_0$. Thus $(\exists n_0)((n_0 \in *\mathbb{N}) \land (\forall n)((n \in *\mathbb{N}) \land (n > n_0) \Rightarrow |*s(n) - r| < \varepsilon))$, being true in $*\mathcal{O}^1(\mathbb{R})$, is a theorem of $\mathcal{T}(\mathcal{O}^1(\mathbb{R}))$. Hence there exists $n_0 \in \mathbb{R}$ such that $|s(n) - r| < \varepsilon$ for all $n > n_0$.

By a similar argument, one obtains the following result.

**Theorem 6.10.** Let $U$ be a subset of $\mathbb{R}$, and suppose $U$ contains a neighbourhood of $a \in \mathbb{R}$. Let $f: U \to \mathbb{R}$ be a function defined on $U$. If $\ell \in \mathbb{R}$, then $\lim_{x \to a} f(x) = \ell$ if and only if $*f(x) \in \mu(\ell)$ for all $x \neq a$ in $\mu(a)$.

**Corollary 6.11.** The function $f$ is continuous at $a$ if and only if $*f(x) \neq *f(a)$ for all

Consequently $*f(x) \rightleftharpoons *f(r) \rightleftharpoons *f(y)$, and we have the condition for uniform continuity on $U$.

Exercise 6.15. Where does the above method of proof fail if $U$ is taken as the open interval $\{x : p < x < q\}$?

Our final application is to the study of sequences of real-valued functions $s_n(x)$ defined on a subset $U$ of $\mathbb{R}$. The usual necessary and sufficient condition that $s_n(x) \rightarrow r(x)$ on $U$ as $n \rightarrow \infty$, when expressed in terms of our non-standard analysis, is that for each $x \in U$ and for all infinite $n$, $*s_n(x) \rightleftharpoons *r(x)$. Again, the meaning of the condition is altered if we express it in terms of $(\forall x)$, as the next result indicates.

Theorem 6.16. The sequence of functions $s_n(x)$ converges uniformly on $U$ to $r(x)$ if and only if for all $x \in *U$ and for all infinite $n$, $*s_n(x) \rightleftharpoons *r(x)$.

Exercise 6.17. Prove Theorem 6.16 by suitably modifying the argument leading to Theorem 6.13.

Theorem 6.18. Suppose the functions $s_n(x)$ are continuous on $U$, and converge uniformly on $U$ to $r(x)$. Then $r(x)$ is continuous on $U$.

Proof. Let $a \in U$. If $x \in *U$ and $x \rightleftharpoons a$, and if $n$ is infinite, then by Corollary 6.11 and Theorem 6.14,

$$*r(s) \rightleftharpoons *s_n(x) \rightleftharpoons *s_n(a) \rightleftharpoons *r(a),$$

showing that $r$ is continuous at $a$.

Exercises

6.19. Given that $f(x) \rightarrow r$ and $g(x) \right

Chapter IX

Turing Machines and Gödel Numbers

§1 Decision Processes

In §3 of Chapter III, we gave a procedure for determining whether or not an element $p$ of $P(X)$ is a theorem of $Prop(X)$. In §4 of Chapter IV, we asserted that no such procedure exists for $Pred(V, \mathcal{R})$. Before attempting to prove this non-existence theorem, we must say more precisely what we mean by "procedure". The procedures we shall discuss are called decision processes, and informally we think of a decision process as a list of instructions which can be applied in a routine fashion to give one of a finite number of specified answers. A decision process for $Pred(V, \mathcal{R})$ is then a finite list of instructions such that for any element $p \in P(V, \mathcal{R})$, there corresponds a unique finite sequence of instructions from the list. The sequence terminates with an instruction to announce a decision of some prescribed kind (e.g., "$p$ is a theorem of $Pred(V, \mathcal{R})$"). Thus at each step of the process, exactly one instruction of the list is applicable, producing a result to which exactly one instruction is applicable, until after a finite (but not necessarily bounded) number of steps, the process stops and a decision is announced.

The mechanical nature of the process just described suggests that we could think of it as a computer program, carried out on a suitable computer. We shall formalise our ideas by considering processes which could be performed by an idealised computer known as a Turing machine.

§2 Turing Machines

A Turing machine is imagined as consisting of two parts—the machine proper, being a device with a finite set $\mathfrak{Q} = \{q_0, q_1, \ldots, q_m\}$ of possible internal states, and a tape (at least potentially infinite) on which suitably coded instructions to the machine may be printed, and on which the machine can print its response. The tape is divided lengthwise into squares which can be indexed by the integers $\mathbb{Z}$. On each square of the tape is printed one symbol selected from a fixed finite set $\mathfrak{S} = \{s_0, s_1, \ldots, s_k\}$, called the alphabet of the machine. Since we think in terms

We assume that the machine must be in internal state $q_0$ to commence operating. The machine operates in discrete steps, its action at any stage being determined by its internal state $q_i$ together with the symbol $s_j$ printed on the square being scanned. The possible actions of the machine are of the following kinds:

(i) The machine replaces the symbol $s_j$ by a symbol $s_t$ and changes its internal state to $q_r$.

(ii) The machine moves the tape so as to scan the square immediately on the right of the one being scanned, and changes its internal state to $q_r$.

(iii) The machine moves the tape so as to scan the square immediately on the left of the one being scanned, and changes its internal state to $q_r$.

(iv) The machine stops.

Since the machine must have no choice of action, exactly one of the above actions will occur at each step.

A Turing machine is specified by giving its set $\mathfrak{Q}$ of internal states, its alphabet $\mathfrak{S}$, and its response to each pair $(q_i, s_j)$ consisting of an internal state and a scanned symbol. Since there are only finitely many pairs $(q_i, s_j)$, the machine response is specified by a finite list. A response of the type (i) can be indicated by quadruples $(q_i, s_j, s_t, q_r)$. Responses (ii) and (iii) can be indicated by the quadruples $(q_i, s_j, R, q_r)$ and $(q_i, s_j, L, q_r)$ respectively, where we have assumed that neither $R$ nor $L$ is in $\mathfrak{S}$. Response (iv) can be specified by having no quadruple beginning with the pair $q_i, s_j$. Our requirement that the machine be deterministic means that the list of responses has at most one quadruple beginning with each pair $q_i, s_j$.

We can now expect the following formal definition of a Turing machine to make sense.

**Definition 2.1.** A Turing machine with (finite) alphabet $\mathfrak{S}$ and (finite) set $\mathfrak{Q}$ of internal states is a subset $M$ of $\mathfrak{Q} \times \mathfrak{

symbol printed on square number $n$ by $s_{j_n}$. Since there are always only finitely many non-blank squares, there exist integers $a, b$ (not unique) such that $j_n = 0$ for all $n < a$ and all $n > b$. $a$ and $b$ can always be selected so that the square currently being scanned, say square number $n$, lies between square number $a$ and square number $b$, so that $a \leqslant n \leqslant b$. (We note that only the ordering of the tape squares is important—it is customary to shift the origin each time the machine shifts the tape, so that the square being scanned becomes the origin.) The contents of the tape are completely specified by the finite string $s_{j_a} s_{j_a+1} \cdots s_{j_b}$, and we shall indicate that the machine is in internal state $q_i$, scanning square $n$ of a tape with these symbols on it, by writing the string

$$s_{j_a} s_{j_a+1} \cdots s_{j_n-1} q_i s_{j_n} \cdots s_{j_b}.$$

**Definition 2.2.** An instantaneous description of a Turing machine $M$ with alphabet $\mathfrak{S}$ and set $\mathfrak{Q}$ of internal states is a finite string $s_{\alpha_1} s_{\alpha_2} \cdots s_{\alpha_r} q_s_{\beta_1} s_{\beta_2} \cdots s_{\beta_t}$, where $s_{\alpha_i}, s_{\beta_j} \in \mathfrak{S}$ and $q \in \mathfrak{Q}$.

The strings $s_{\alpha_1} \cdots s_{\alpha_r}$ and $s_{\beta_1} \cdots s_{\beta_t}$ are often denoted by single symbols such as $\sigma, \tau$. An instantaneous description $d = s_{\alpha_1} s_{\alpha_2} \cdots s_{\alpha_r} q_s_{\beta_1} s_{\beta_2} \cdots s_{\beta_t}$ is then written simply as $d = \sigma q \tau$. Each of $\sigma, \tau$ may be

$d' \in [d']$ so that $d$ and $d'$ are related as in (i), (ii) or (iii) of the definition (appropriately modified if $\sigma$ or $\tau$ is empty).

**Definition 2.5.** A state $[\sigma q \tau]$ is called *initial* if $q = q_0$. A state $[\sigma q s_\alpha \tau_1]$ is called *terminal* if there is no quadruple $(q, s_\alpha, c, d)$ in $M$.

**Exercise 2.6.** Show that $[d]$ is terminal if and only if there does not exist a state $[d']$ such that $[d] \xrightarrow{M} [d']$.

**Definition 2.7.** A *computation* by the machine $M$ is a finite sequence $[d_0], [d_1], \ldots, [d_p]$ of states such that $[d_0]$ is initial, $[d_p]$ is terminal and $[d_i] \xrightarrow{M} [d_{i+1}]$ for $i = 0, 1, \ldots, p - 1$.

Computations are by definition finite. Given $M$ and $[d]$, there is no guarantee that $M$, started in state $[d]$ and allowed to operate, will ever stop (i.e., will execute a computation).

**Definition 2.8.** We say that $M$ fails for the input $[d_0]$ if there is no computation by $M$ beginning with the state $[d_0]$.

For each state $[d_i]$, there is a unique $[d_{i+1}]$ such that $[d_i] \xrightarrow{M} [d_{i+1}]$. Hence failure of $M$ for the input $[d_0]$ means that the sequence of states taken by $M$ and beginning with $[d_0]$ is infinite—i.e., the machine never stops.

Henceforth, the state $[d]$ will be denoted simply by some description $d$. The context will make clear the sense in which symbols such as $d, d_i$ are being used.

**Exercises**

$M_2$ such that, if $\sigma q_i \tau$ is the output of $M_1$, then $\sigma q_0 \tau$ is the input for $M_2$. Show that there is a Turing machine $M$, whose alphabet contains $\mathfrak{S}$, such that if $M$ is started in an initial state of a computation by $M_1$ and $M_2$ with terminal state $\sigma q_j \tau$, then $M$ executes a computation with terminal state $\sigma q_k \tau$ for some $q_k$, while $M$ fails if started in any other initial state.

2.13. $M_1, \ldots, M_n$ are Turing machines with the same alphabet. An algorithm requires that at each step, exactly one of $M_1, \ldots, M_n$ be applied to the result of the previous step. The Turing machine $M$, applied to the output of any step, determines which of $M_1, \ldots, M_n$ is to be applied for the next step. Show that there is a single Turing machine which can execute the algorithm and give the same ultimate output.

2.14. Most digital computers can read and write on magnetic tape. The tapes are finite, but the operator can replace them if they run out. Show that such computers can be regarded as Turing machines. In fact, the most sophisticated computers can be regarded as Turing machines. (This is not a mathematical exercise. The reader is asked to review his experience of computers and to see that the definitions given so far are broad enough to embrace the computational features of the computers he has used.)

§3 Recursive Functions

Let $M$ be a Turing machine with alphabet $\mathfrak{S}$. We show how to use $M$ to associate with each pair $(k, \ell)$ of natural numbers a subset $U_M^{(k, \ell)}$ of $\mathbb{N}^k$ and a function $\Psi_M^{(k, \ell)}: U_M^{(k, \ell)} \to \mathbb{N}^\ell$. For $(n_1, \ldots, n_k) \in \mathbb{N}^k$, put

$$\text{code}(n_1, \ldots, n_k) = s_1^{n_1} s_0

Exercises

3.2. $f: U \rightarrow \mathbb{N}^t$ is a partial recursive function with domain $U \subseteq \mathbb{N}^k$. Show that there is a Turing machine $M$ such that $\Psi_M^{(k, t)} = f$ and such that, for each $(n_1, \ldots, n_k) \in U$, the computation $d_0, d_1, \ldots, d_t$ by $M$ which begins with $d_0 = q_0$ code $(n_1, \ldots, n_k)$ ends with $d_t = q$ code $f(n_1, \ldots, n_k)$ for some internal state $q$ of $M$.

3.3. Prove that the composition of (partial) recursive functions is (partial) recursive.

3.4. The real number $r$ has decimal expansion $t = r_0 \cdot r_1 r_2 r_3 \cdots$. Given that the function $f: \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ defined by $f(n) = r_n$ is not recursive, prove that $r$ is transcendental.

3.5. A subset $U$ of $\mathbb{N}$ is called recursively enumerable if it is the range of a recursive function $f: \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$, or else is empty. Show that $U \subseteq \mathbb{N}$ is recursively enumerable if and only if it is the domain of a partial recursive function.

3.6. A subset $U$ of $\mathbb{N}$ is called recursive if its characteristic function is recursive. Prove that $U \subseteq \mathbb{N}$ is recursive if and only if both $U$ and $\mathbb{N} - U$ are recursively enumerable.

3.7. Write a FORTRAN program for calculating the greatest common divisor of two integers of unlimited size (possibly beyond the storage capacity of the machine), assuming the availability of unlimited magnetic tape.

§4 Gödel Numbers

We are interested in delimiting the scope of computations performable by Turing machines, and we are also interested in using Turing machines to formalise

number of $M$. Denote an element $(a, b, c, d) \in M$ by the string $abcd$. The strings of $M$ have a natural lexicographic order, and by taking all the strings of $M$ in this order we associate with $M$ a unique finite sequence of strings of symbols. We shall define the Gödel number $G(M)$ of $M$ by defining in turn Gödel numbers for every symbol, for every string of symbols and lastly for every finite sequence of strings of symbols.

Define a function $G: \{L, R\} \cup \mathfrak{S}^* \cup \mathfrak{Q}^* \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ by

$$G(L) = 1, G(R) = 3, G(s_i) = 4i + 5, G(q_j) = 4j + 7(i, j \in \mathbb{N}).$$

If now the symbols $a_i$ have Gödel numbers $G(a_i) = n_i (i = 1, \ldots, r)$, then we define the Gödel number of the string $a_1 \cdots a_r$ by

$$G(a_1 \cdots a_r) = p_1^{n_1} \cdots p_r^{n_r},$$

where $p_k$ denotes the $k$th prime (so that $p_1 = 2, p_2 = 3, \ldots$). The empty string has no Gödel number attached to it.

If $\sigma_1, \ldots, \sigma_s$ are strings of symbols, then we define the Gödel number of the sequence $\sigma_1, \ldots, \sigma_s$ by

$$G(\sigma_1, \ldots, \sigma_s) = p_1^{G(\sigma_1)} p_2^{G(\sigma_2)} \cdots p_s^{G(\sigma_s)}.$$

Finally, the Gödel number of the Turing machine $M$ is defined to be the Gödel number of the unique finite sequence of strings associated with $M$ in the way described before.

Exercises

(In many subsequent exercises, the reader is required to construct a Turing machine. The reader is asked to interpret this

4.5. Turing machines can be ordered by the size of their Gödel numbers. Let $f(n)$ be the Gödel number of the $(n + 1)$-th Turing machine. Show that $f: \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ is recursive.

4.6. Use cardinality considerations to prove that there exists a non-recursive function $f: \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$.

4.7. Show that there is a Turing machine $U$ with the property that, for each Turing machine $M$ and shortest description $d$ of an initial state, $U$ started in the state $q$ code $(G(M), G(d))$

(i) fails if $M$ fails in the state $d$,

(ii) computes $G(d_t)$ if $d_t$ is the shortest description of the terminal state reached by $M$ starting from $d$.

A machine such as $U$ is called a universal Turing machine.

In order to apply Turing machines to questions of decidability of mathematical theories, we must be able to encode elements of the appropriate algebras of propositions. We do this by again constructing a universal alphabet and then defining more Gödel numbers. As we can only hope to code countable theories, we confine our attention to them. For each $i \in \mathbb{N}$, the subset $\mathcal{R}_i$ of the set $\mathcal{R}$ of relations of any countable theory is at most countable, so we take a universal set $\mathcal{R}^* = \{r_{ij}|i, j \in \mathbb{N}\}$ of relation symbols, where, for each $j, r_{ij} \in \mathcal{R}_i^*$. Likewise, we take a set $C^* = \{c_j|j \in \mathbb{N}\}$ of constants, and a set $X^* = \{x_j|j \in \mathbb{N}\}$ of variables, and put $V^* = C^* \cup X^*$. For operation symbols we take $F, \Rightarrow$ and $\{(\forall x_j)|j \in \mathbb{N}\}$. We now have a universal alphabet in which every countable theory can be written. Each

algebra sense—e.g., $11 = G(q_1) = G(c_0)$. Modify our definitions of Gödel numbers so that each $n \in \mathbb{N}$ is a Gödel number in at most one way.

4.10. Show that the function $f: \mathbb{N} \times \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ defined by $f(m, n) = 1$ if $m, n$ are Gödel numbers of elements of $\tilde{P}(V^*, \mathcal{R}^*)$ which represent the same element of $P(V^*, \mathcal{R}^*), f(m, n) = 0$ if $m, n$ are Gödel numbers of elements of $\tilde{P}(V^*, \mathcal{R}^*)$ which represent different elements of $P(V^*, \mathcal{R}^*), f(m, n) = 2$ if either of $m, n$ is not the Gödel number of an element of $\tilde{P}(V^*, \mathcal{R}^*)$, is a recursive function.

§5 Insoluble Problems in Mathematics

We consider various ways in which a mathematical problem can be insoluble, and we begin with two well-known examples—the classical problem of trisecting an angle, and the problem of solving quintic equations. The trisection problem is insoluble by Euclidean construction, but admits a simple solution if a quite minor extension of method is permitted (see [14]). Although there is no formula for the solution of quintic equations by radicals, there is one in terms of elliptic functions (see [5]). Clearly, insolubility of a particular problem depends on a precise statement as to what constitutes a solution.

Each of the above problems is in fact a family of problems. Since a right angle can be trisected, not every angle is impossible to trisect. There exist quintic equations whose solutions are expressible in terms of radicals. The trisection problem asks for a construction which works for every angle, and the non-existence of such a construction follows from the proof that an angle of $\pi/3$ cannot be trisected. Likewise, the existence of a single quintic equation that is insoluble by radicals suffices to demonstrate the

This means that if $\mathcal{T}$ is effectively axiomatised, then there is a Turing machine which, when given the Gödel number of an element $q \in P(V^*, \mathcal{R}^*)$, tells us whether or not $q$ is an axiom of $\mathcal{T}$. From the discussion above, it follows that for an effectively axiomatised theory $\mathcal{T} = (\mathcal{R}, A, C)$, there is a Turing machine which, when given the Gödel numbers of $p \in \mathcal{L}(\mathcal{T})$ and of the sequence $p_1, p_2, \ldots, p_n$ of elements of $P(V, \mathcal{R})$, tells us if $p_1, p_2, \ldots, p_n$ is a proof of $p$ in $\mathcal{T}$. Furthermore, there is a Turing machine which, when given the Gödel number of a theorem $p$ of $\mathcal{T}$, computes the smallest number which is the Gödel number of a proof of $p$.

Suppose now that $p$ is not a theorem of $\mathcal{T}$. If it is the case that $\sim p$ is a theorem of $\mathcal{T}$, then finding a proof of $\sim p$ will not by itself solve our problem, because we would also have to show that $\mathcal{T}$ is consistent, i.e., that $F$ is not a theorem of $\mathcal{T}$. However, if $p$ is not a theorem of $\mathcal{T}$, then the theory $\mathcal{T}' = (\mathcal{R}, A \cup \{\sim p\}, C)$ is consistent, and hence has a model. The construction of a model of $\mathcal{T}'$ would clearly show that $p$ is not a theorem of $\mathcal{T}$. Thus, for any effectively axiomatised theory $\mathcal{T}$ and any $p$, the problem of deciding whether or not $p$ is a theorem $\mathcal{T}$ is soluble: find a proof of $p$ if $p$ is a theorem, or a model of $\mathcal{T}$ in which $p$ is false if $p$ is not a theorem. Of course, we have not given a general procedure for finding the solution—that is a different problem.

We now consider the case of a family $\{p_n | p

expect—a "yes/no" answer. We do not require the Turing machine which provides this answer also to prove it by giving either a proof or a counter-model for each $p_n$. If the present formulation of a solution produces undecidable theories, then any more rigorous requirement must be expected to render even more problems insoluble.

Exercise 5.4. The consistent theory $\mathcal{T}$ is effectively axiomatised and complete. Show that $\mathcal{T}$ is decidable. Show further that there is a Turing machine which, given the Gödel number of an element $p \in \mathcal{L}(\mathcal{T})$, answers the question of whether or not $p$ is a theorem, and also provides a proof of its answer.

The notion that a family of objects can have a recursively insoluble decision problem of some kind can be applied to situations in our informal mathematics, as the following example shows. Later, we shall find examples within formal mathematical structures.

Example 5.5. Let $M_n$ denote the $n$th Turing machine. The problem is to determine for all integers $n, r$, whether or not there is a computation of $M_n$ beginning with the state $q_0$ code($r$). I.e., the problem is to determine whether or not an arbitrary Turing machine $M_n$, fed with an arbitrary integer $r$, stops. We show that this stopping problem is recursively insoluble. Put $f_n = \Psi_{M_n}^{(1,1)}$. The problem is to determine those $(n, r)$ for which $f_n(r)$ exists, and we show that there is no Turing machine which computes for each $n$ whether or not $f_n(n)$ exists. Suppose the function $f: \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ defined by

$$f(n) = 1 \quad \text{if} \quad f_n(n) \text{ exists},$$

$$f(n) = 0 \text{ otherwise},$$

is recursive. Then the function $g: \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ defined by

$$g(n) = f_n(n) + 1 \quad \text{if} \quad f_n(n) \text{ exists},$$

$$g(n) = 0 \text{

5.7. Let $A = \{n \in \mathbb{N} \mid f_n$ is recursive\}. Prove that $A$ is not recursively enumerable.

5.8. Let $E$ be a recursively enumerable subset of $\mathbb{N}$. Show that there exists a Turing machine which, started in the state $q_0 s_1^n$, stops with blank tape if $n \in E$, and fails to stop if $n \notin E$. (Hint: if $f: \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ is a recursive function with $f(\mathbb{N}) = E$, then, for given $n$, compute in turn $f(0), f(1), \ldots$ until the first $r$ (if any) for which $f(r) = n$ is found.)

§6 Insoluble Problems in Arithmetic

In §5 we gave an example of a family of objects in informal mathematics for which a decision problem is recursively insoluble. We now wish to convert this example into an example within formal arithmetic. We do this in a way which will allow us to apply some of our ideas and results to other interesting systems. For that reason, we shall be concerned with theories which formalise some aspects of the theory of $\mathbb{N}$ (which is our underlying object of study) and it is convenient to set down first some notational conventions and some definitions. Throughout this section, $\theta, s, a, m$ respectively denote the property of being 0, the successor relation, the addition relation and the multiplication relation. Whenever $\mathbb{N}$ is given as a model of a theory $\mathcal{T}$, it is understood that any of $\theta, s, a, m$ which are relation symbols of $\mathcal{T}$ have their standard interpretations. Axioms which we will use in our constructions are

1) the Peano axioms $P_1, P_2, P_3, P_4, P_5$ of the first-order theory $\mathcal{P}$ of §4 of Chapter VI. (Recall that the scope of the axiom scheme of induction $(P_5)$ depends on the theory under consideration.)

2) the addition axioms

$$\text{add}_1 = (\for

We call $N$ recursive arithmetic. To assist us, we shall also use the theory $N_0$, which differs from $N$ only in that the axiom scheme of induction is excluded from the axioms. Both $N$ and $N_0$ are effectively axiomatised. As we need to compare theories, we make the following definitions.

**Definition 6.1.** Let $\mathcal{T} = (\mathcal{R}, A, C)$ and $\mathcal{T}' = (\mathcal{R}', A', C')$ be first-order theories. We say $\mathcal{T}'$ extends $\mathcal{T}$, and write $\mathcal{T}' \supseteq \mathcal{T}$, if $\mathcal{R}' \supseteq \mathcal{R}, A' \supseteq A$ and $C' \supseteq C$.

**Definition 6.2.** Let $\mathcal{T}' \supseteq \mathcal{T}$, and let $M = (M, v, \psi)$ be a model of $\mathcal{T}$. We say that $M$ extends to a model of $\mathcal{T}'$ if there exist $v': C' \rightarrow M$ and $\psi': \mathcal{R}' \rightarrow \text{rel}(M)$, extending $v, \psi$ respectively, such that $(M, v', \psi')$ is a model of $\mathcal{T}'$.

**Definition 6.3.** Let $\mathcal{T} = (\mathcal{R}, A, C) \supseteq N_0$ and have $N$ as model. Let $f: U \rightarrow N$ be a function defined on some subset $U$ of $N$. We say that $f$ is strongly definable in $\mathcal{T}$ if there is an element $p(x, y) \in P(V, \mathcal{R})$ such that, for all $m, n \in N$, $\mathcal{T} \vdash p(m, n)$ if and only if $m \in U$ and $f(m) = n$. The definition is extended in the obvious way for functions of several variables.

The key result we intend to prove is that if $\mathcal{T} \supseteq N_0$ and has $N$ as model, then every partial recursive function is strongly definable in $\mathcal{T}$. The

Proof. Let $T(n)$ denote the $n$th triangular number:

$$T(n) = 1 + 2 + \cdots + n = \frac{1}{2}n(n + 1).$$

For each $z > 0$, there is a unique $n$ such that

$$T(n) < z \leqslant T(n + 1) = T(n) + n + 1.$$

Thus $z$ is uniquely expressible as $z = T(n) + y$ with $0 < y \leqslant n + 1$. (We choose this range for $y$ because later we shall need $y \neq 0$.) Put $x = n + 2 - y$. Then $x, y$ are uniquely determined functions of $z$, which we denote by $L(z), R(z)$ respectively. Put $P(x, y) = T(x + y - 2)$. $P, L, R$ are strongly definable functions, for we may regard $z = P(x, y)$ as an abbreviation for

$$(x > 0) \wedge (y > 0) \wedge (2z = (x + y - 2)(x + y - 1) + 2y),$$

$x = L(z)$ as one for

$$(x > 0) \wedge (z > 0) \wedge (\exists y)((y > 0) \wedge (2z = (x + y - 2)(x + y - 1) + 2y)),$$

and $y = R(z)$ as one for

$$(y > 0) \wedge (z > 0) \wedge (\exists x)((x > 0) \wedge (2z = (x + y - 2)(x + y - 1) + 2y)).$$

The function $\text{seq}(b, r)$ is defined to be the remainder on division of $L(b)$ by $1 + (r + 1)R(b)$. This is strongly definable, the relation $z = \text{seq}(x, y)$ being given by

$$(x > 0) \wedge (z < 1 + (y + 1)R(x)) \

The sequence number function defined in Lemma 6.5 enables us to give definitions in $\mathcal{T}$ of various functions describing a computation by a Turing machine $M$. We give the definitions and leave the reader to verify them. If $M$ has a quadruple $(q_\alpha, s_\beta, a, b)$, we define $M_\alpha, \beta(x, y, z) \in P(V, \mathcal{R})$ as follows. We have $b = q_\gamma$ for some $\gamma$, $a = s_\beta'$ (for some $\beta'$) or $a = L$ or $a = R$.

Put

$$M_\alpha, \beta(x, y, z) = (\text{seq}(x, 0) = G(q_\alpha)) \wedge (\text{seq}(x, 1) = G(s_\beta))$$

$$\wedge (y = 0 \Rightarrow z = G(q_\gamma)) \wedge K(x, y, z),$$

where

$$K(x, y, z) = (y = 1 \Rightarrow z = G(s_\beta')) \wedge (y > 1 \Rightarrow z = \text{seq}(x, y)) \text{ if } a = s_\beta',$$

$$K(x, y, z) = \left[ (\exists k)(y = 2k + 1) \Rightarrow z = \text{seq}(x, y + 2) \right] \wedge (y = 2 \Rightarrow z = \text{seq}(x, 1))$$

$$\wedge \left[ (\exists k)(y = 2k + 4) \Rightarrow z = \text{seq}(x, y - 2) \right] \text{ if } a = R,$$

$$K(x, y, z) = (y = 1 \Rightarrow z = \text{seq}(x, 2) \wedge \left[ (\exists k)(y = 2k + 3) \Rightarrow z = \text{seq}(x, y - 2) \right])$$

$$\wedge \left[ (\exists k)(y = 2k + 2) \Rightarrow z = \text{seq}(x, i +

function whose value at $y$ is $z$, by

$$(\exists x) (\psi(u, v; x, y, z) \wedge (\forall x') (x' > x \Rightarrow (\forall t) (\sim \psi(u, v; x', y, t))))$$.

**Theorem 6.9.** Let $\mathcal{T} \supseteq \mathcal{N}_0$ be a theory with $\mathbb{N}$ as model. Then every partial recursive function is strongly definable in $\mathcal{T}$.

**Proof.** The formulae given above, together with a description of the input function in terms of the arguments of $\Psi_M^{(k, \ell)}$, can be adapted to give a definition of $\Psi_M^{(k, \ell)}$. The reader is asked to supply the details. $\square$

We are now able to provide an example of an insoluble decision problem within the formal theory $\mathcal{N}$. From Theorem 6.9, it follows that any relation on $\mathbb{N}$ whose characteristic function is recursive is also strongly definable in any theory $\mathcal{T}$ of the type considered above. In particular, there is a formula, $\text{comp}(x_1, x_2, x_3)$ say, defining the relation that the machine of Gödel number $x_1$, applied to the number $x_2$, computes $x_3$. Reference to Example 5.5 shows that the family $\{(\exists x) \text{comp}(n, n, x) | n \in \mathbb{N}\}$ has an insoluble decision problem.

**Theorem 6.10.** Let $\mathcal{T} \supseteq \mathcal{N}_0$ be a theory which has $\mathbb{N}$ as model. Then $\mathcal{T}$ is undecidable. In particular, $\mathcal{N}$ is undecidable.

**Proof.** A decision process for $\mathcal{T}$ would provide a decision process for the family $\{(\exists x) \text{comp}(n, n, x) | n \in \mathbb{N}\}$. $\square$

**Theorem 6.11.** Let $\mathcal{T} \supseteq \mathcal{N}_0$ be

and $a$ is the Gödel number of a theorem of $\mathcal{T}$. Since $\varphi(m, n) = G(w(m))$, we see that $a$ must be both the Gödel number of $w(m)$ and the Gödel number of a theorem. Hence $\pi(m, n)$ is true in $\mathbb{N}$ if and only if $\mathcal{T} \vdash w(m)$. We now choose $w(x_0) = \sim \pi(x_0, x_0)$, so that $n = G(\sim \pi(x_0, x_0))$, and put $q = w(n)$. Then $\pi(n, n)$ is true in $\mathbb{N}$ if and only if $\mathcal{T} \vdash q$. But $q = \sim \pi(n, n)$, hence $\mathcal{T} \vdash q$ if and only if $q$ is false in $\mathbb{N}$. Since $\mathbb{N}$ is a model of $\mathcal{T}$, $\mathcal{T} \vdash q$ implies $q$ is true in $\mathbb{N}$. Hence $q$ cannot be a theorem of $\mathcal{T}$, which from the condition above implies $q$ is true in $\mathbb{N}$, which then implies that $\sim q$ cannot be a theorem of $\mathcal{T}$. Thus $q = \sim \pi(n, n)$ has the property required to demonstrate the incompleteness of $\mathcal{T}$.

We note that this incompleteness cannot be cured by adding $q$ as an axiom to form a new theory $\mathcal{T}' \supseteq \mathcal{T}$, because replacing theorem $x_3$ by theorem $x_3'(x_3)$ in our construction provides another element $q'$ with the requisite properties. The proof shows that no effective axiomatisation of $\mathbb{N}$ can lead to a complete theory.

The result of Theorem 6.11 is known as Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorem.

Exercises

6.12. Show that $\{n \in \mathbb{N} \mid n = G(p)\}$ for some $p \in \mathcal{L}(\mathbb{N})$ true in $\mathbb{N}$ is not recursively enumerable.

6.1

$p(x_1, \ldots, x_r) \in P(V - \mathbb{N}, \mathcal{R})$, such that there exist integers $n_1, \ldots, n_r$ for which $p = p(n_1, \ldots, n_r)$. We define $\varphi: \mathcal{L}(\mathcal{N}_0) \rightarrow \mathcal{L}(\mathcal{N}_1)$ by

$$\varphi(p) = (\forall x_1) \cdots (\forall x_r) (e_{n_1}(x_1) \wedge \cdots \wedge e_{n_r}(x_r) \Rightarrow p(x_1, \ldots, x_r)).$$

In order to complete the proof by an appeal to the previous lemma, we have to show that $\mathcal{N}_0 \vdash p$ if and only if $\mathcal{N}_1 \vdash \varphi(p)$. Suppose that $\mathcal{N}_1 \vdash \varphi(p)$. Since $\mathcal{N}_0 \supseteq \mathcal{N}_1$, $\mathcal{N}_0 \vdash \varphi(p)$. Since $e_{n_i}(n_i)$ is an axiom of $\mathcal{N}_0$ for all $i$, it follows immediately that $\mathcal{N}_0 \vdash p(n_1, \ldots, n_r)$, i.e., that $\mathcal{N}_0 \vdash p$. Now suppose $\mathcal{N}_0 \vdash p$. Since $\mathcal{N}_1 \vdash (\exists!x)e_n(x)$ for each $n \in \mathbb{N}$, then for each $n \in \mathbb{N}$ there is in any model $M$ of $\mathcal{N}_1$ a unique element $m_n \in M$ such that $M \vDash e_n(m_n)$. By mapping $n$ to $m_n$ we make $M$ a model of $\mathcal{N}_0$, so $p(m_{n_1}, \ldots, m_{n_r})$ is true in $M$. The uniqueness of the $m_n$ now implies that $\varphi(p)$ is true in $M$. Thus $\varphi(p)$ is true in every model of $\mathcal{

Proof: The inclusion $P(V, \mathcal{R}) \rightarrow P(V, \mathcal{R}^*)$ satisfies the conditions of Lemma 7.1. $\square$

We end the chapter with the proof of a stronger result due to Kalmar.

Theorem 7.5. Let $r$ be a binary predicate symbol. Then $\text{Pred}(V, \{r\})$ is undecidable.

Before giving the formal proof, we note that the result implies that if $\mathcal{R}$ contains at least one $n$-ary relation symbol with $n \geqslant 2$, then $\text{Pred}(V, \mathcal{R})$ is undecidable. The theorem will be proved by constructing a function $f: P(V, \{\rho\}) \rightarrow P(V, \{r\})$, where $\rho$ is a 4-ary relation symbol, such that $f(p)$ is a theorem if and only if $p$ is a theorem, and in addition such that if $\text{var}(p) = \varnothing$, then $\text{var}(f(p)) = \varnothing$. The construction uses the following idea, which shows how to express a 4-ary relation $\rho$ on a given set $S$ in terms of a binary relation $r$ on a related set $S'$. (For convenience we shall use $\rho$, $r$ also to denote interpretations of the relation symbols $\rho, r$).

Lemma 7.6. Let $\rho$ be a 4-ary relation on the non-empty set $S$. Put $S' = \{K\} \cup S^2 \cup S^4$. For $x \in S$, define $\Delta(x) = (x, x) \in S'$. Let $r$ be the binary relation on $S'$ consisting of those pairs $(a, b)$ for which at least one of the following holds:

(i) $a = (x, y), b = (z, t)$, where $x, y, z, t \in S$ and $x = y = z$ or $y = z = t$,
(ii) $a = (x, y), b = (x, y, z, t)$ where $x, y, z, t \

$x \in \text{var}(p)$, while if $\text{var}(p) = \varnothing$, $\pi_p$ is not defined. The kernel $k(p)$ is defined inductively by

$$k(F) = F,$$
$$k(\rho(x, y, z, t)) = R(x, y, z, t) \text{ for all } x, y, z, t \in V,$$
$$k(p \Rightarrow q) = k(p) \Rightarrow k(q),$$
$$k((\forall x)p) = (\forall x)(r(x, x) \Rightarrow k(p)).$$

We now put

$$f(p) = \pi_p \Rightarrow k(p) \quad \text{if} \quad \text{var}(p) \neq \varnothing,$$
$$f(p) = k(p) \quad \text{if} \quad \text{var}(p) = \varnothing,$$

and show $f$ satisfies the conditions of Lemma 7.1. Suppose that $\text{var}(p) = \varnothing$ and $f(p)$ is a theorem. The truth or falsity of $p$ in any interpretation depends only on the choice of the set $S$ and of the 4-ary relation $\rho$ on $S$. We construct $S'$, and $r$ on $S'$, as in Lemma 7.6. Since the definition of $f$ effectively limits consideration to elements of $\Delta(S)$, we find that $p$ is true in $S$ if and only if $f(p)$ is true in $S'$. Since $f(p)$ is a theorem, we conclude that $p$ is true in every interpretation and so is also a theorem.

Conversely, suppose $p$ is a theorem, and let $p_1, \ldots, p_n$ be a proof of $p$. We use induction over $n$ to show that $f(p)$ is a theorem. (We do not assume $\text{var}(p) = \varnothing$, as this would upset the induction.) Suppose then that $f(p_1), \ldots, f(p_{n-1})$ are theorems. There are three possibilities for $p_n

Chapter X

Hilbert’s Tenth Problem, Word Problems

§1 Hilbert’s Tenth Problem

A recursive function $f: \mathbb{N}^n \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ has been defined as one for which there is a Turing machine, $T_f$ say, which computes $f(x_1, \ldots, x_n)$ for all $(x_1, \ldots, x_n) \in \mathbb{N}^n$. Accordingly, in order to show that a particular function $g: \mathbb{N}^n \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ is recursive, we must construct a Turing machine which computes $g$. This is a tiresome process, even for functions of relatively simple form, and consequently it is natural to seek an alternative characterisation of recursive functions that will facilitate their recognition.

We are accustomed to constructing or decomposing complicated functions in terms of simple functions in other branches of mathematics—for example, use of the chain rule in the differential calculus depends upon the possibility of expressing a function as a composition of simpler functions. We therefore ask if it is possible to build up the set of recursive functions by starting with a set of simple functions and applying certain permissible operations to them. The fact that this can be done is remarkable, for not only does it provide an algebraic characterisation of recursive functions, but it also offers strong support for a belief (known as “Church’s Thesis”) that all formulations of the concept of an “effectively computable” function must be equivalent (i.e., must produce the same set of functions). For a detailed proof of the characterisation given in Theorem 1.2 below, we refer the reader to [3]. Other accounts of the subject may be found, for example, in [6], [10] or [13].

As initial functions, we take the set $I$ consisting of

(i) the zero function $c: \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ given by $c(x) = 0$,

(ii) the successor function $s: \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ given by $s(x) = x + 1$,

(iii) the projection functions $U_i^n: \mathbb{N}^n \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ ($n \

(iii) minimalisation: given $f, g: \mathbb{N}^{n+1} \rightarrow \mathbb{N} (n \in \mathbb{N}^+)$ satisfying the condition that for each $(x_1, \ldots, x_n) \in \mathbb{N}^n$ there exists at least one $y$ such that $f(x_1, \ldots, x_n, y) = g(x_1, \ldots, x_n, y)$, minimalisation yields the function $h: \mathbb{N}^n \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ given by

$$h(x_1, \ldots, x_n) = \min_y \left( f(x_1, \ldots, x_n, y) = g(x_1, \ldots, x_n, y) \right)$$

$$= \text{the least } y \in \mathbb{N} \text{ such that } f(x_1, \ldots, x_n, y) = g(x_1, \ldots, x_n, y).$$

Theorem 1.2. The set of recursive functions coincides with the set of functions obtainable from the set $I$ of initial functions by finite interations of the above operations.

Exercises

1.3. Prove that the functions $+(x, y) = x + y, \times(x, y) = xy$ and $c_k(x) = k (k \in \mathbb{N})$ are recursive, by using Theorem 1.2. Deduce that every polynomial $P: \mathbb{N}^n \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ with coefficients in $\mathbb{N}$ is a recursive function.

1.4. (Cf Lemma 6.5 of Chapter IX.) Define the pairing function $p: \mathbb{N}^2 \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ by $p(x, y) = \sum_{r=0}^{x+y} r + y$. Prove that $p$ is bijective, and hence show that the functions $\ell, r: \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ given by $p(\ell(z), r(z)) = z$ are well-defined. Show that $p, \ell$ and $r$

Given a polynomial $P(x_1, \ldots, x_n)$, an obvious subset of $\mathbb{N}^n$ related to it is its solution set $S = \{(x_1, \ldots, x_n) | P(x_1, \ldots, x_n) = 0\}$. For $k = 1, \ldots, n - 1$, the projection $S_k$ of $S$ onto the first $k$ coordinates is given by the set of $(x_1, \ldots, x_k)$ such that there exist $x_{k+1}, \ldots, x_n$ for which $P(x_1, \ldots, x_n) = 0$. Thus membership of the set $S_k$ is related directly to the existence of a solution to $P$. The following definition generalises this relation.

**Definition 1.5.** (i) $S \subseteq \mathbb{N}^n$ is diophantine if there is a polynomial $P(x_1, \ldots, x_n, y_1, \ldots, y_m)$ in $m + n \geqslant n$ variables such that $(x_1, \ldots, x_n) \in S$ if and only if there exist values $y_1, \ldots, y_m$ for which $P(x_1, \ldots, x_n, y_1, \ldots, y_m) = 0$.

(ii) A relation $\rho$ on $\mathbb{N}^n$ is diophantine if the set $\{(x_1, \ldots, x_n) | \rho(x_1, \ldots, x_n)\}$ is true is diophantine. In particular, a function $f: \mathbb{N}^n \to \mathbb{N}$ is diophantine if $\{(x_1, \ldots, x_n, y) | y = f(x_1, \ldots, x_n)\}$ is diophantine.

For brevity, we shall write the condition that $S$ is diophantine informally as

$$(x_1, \ldots, x_n) \in S \text{ iff } (\exists y_1, \ldots, y

where $P, Q$ are polynomials with coefficients in $N$. Denoting the sequence number function by $S(z, i)$, then Lemma 6.5 of Chapter IX shows that there exists, for every choice of $y, t_1, \ldots, t_m$, a value $u$ such that $S(u, 0) = y, S(u, 1) = t_1, \ldots, S(u, m) = t_m$. Since $f$ is a function, there is exactly one $y$ for which $P = Q$, hence

$$f(x_1, \ldots, x_n) = y = S\left(\min_u\left(P(x_1, \ldots, x_n, S(u, 0), \ldots, S(u, m))\right) = Q\left(x_1, \ldots, x_n, S(u, 0), \ldots, S(u, m)\right)\right),$$

which, by Exercise 1.4 and Theorem 1.2, shows that $f$ is recursive.

The essential difficulties arise in attempting to prove the converse to the above result. Using Theorem 1.2, it suffices to prove that every initial function is diophantine, and that the diophantine functions are closed with respect to the operations of composition, primitive recursion and minimalisation. Some of this is easy. Exercise 1.10 has dealt with the initial functions, while if $f_1, \ldots, f_n$ and $g$ are diophantine, and if $h(x_1, \ldots, x_m) = g(f_1(x_1, \ldots, x_m), \ldots, f_n(x_1, \ldots, x_m))$, then so is $h$, because

$$y = h(x_1, \ldots, x_m) \text{ iff } (\exists t_1, \ldots, t_n)\left(t_1 = f_1(x_1, \ldots, x_m)\right) \text{ and } \ldots \text{ and}$$

$$t_n = f_n(x_1, \ldots, x_m) \text{ and } y = f(t_1, \ldots, t_n)),$$

$(\exists u)((\exists v)(v = S(u, 0) \wedge v = f(x_1, \ldots, x_n)) \wedge (\forall t \leqslant z)(t = z \vee (\exists w)(w = S(u, t + 1) \wedge w = g(t, S(u, t), x_1, \ldots, x_n)) \wedge y = S(u, z))$

which, by Exercises 1.11 and 1.12, shows that $h$ is diophantine.

Finally, if $f, g$ are diophantine and

$$h(x_1, \ldots, x_n) = \min_y(f(x_1, \ldots, x_n, y) = g(x_1, \ldots, x_n, y)),$$

then $y = h(x_1, \ldots, x_n)$ if and only if

$(\exists z)(z = f(x_1, \ldots, x_n, y) \wedge z = g(x_1, \ldots, x_n, y)) \wedge (\forall t \leqslant y)(t = y \vee (\exists u)(\exists v)(u = f(x_1, \ldots, x_n, t) \wedge v = g(x_1, \ldots, x_n, t) \wedge (u < v \vee v < u)))$

showing that $h$ is diophantine. $\square$

We may therefore state the following fundamental result.

**Theorem 1.16.** A function is recursive if and only if it is diophantine.

In chapter IX, we showed the existence of a subset $E$ of $\mathbb{N}$ which is recursively enumerable but not recursive. That is, $E$ is the range of some recursive function, but the characteristic function of $E$ is not a recursive function. Theorem 1.16 implies that a subset of $\mathbb{N}$ is recursively enumerable if and only if it is diophantine. Hence $E$ is diophantine, and so there is a polynomial $P$ such that

$$x \in E

proof that Hilbert’s tenth problem is insoluble by showing that the existence of a “Hilbert algorithm” would imply that $g$ is recursive.

§2 Word Problems

A group $G$ is often specified by giving a set $X$ of generators of $G$ together with a set $R$ of relations satisfied by these generators. The set $R$ is required to be such that every relation on the elements of $X$ which holds in $G$ is a consequence of those in $R$. Here, a relation is an equation $w_1(a_1, \ldots, a_n) = w_2(a_1, \ldots, a_n)$ which holds in $G$, where $a_1, \ldots, a_n$ are particular elements of $X$ and $w_1, w_2$ are group theoretical words. We can express such an equation in the form $w_1(a_1, \ldots, a_n)(w_2(a_1, \ldots, a_n))^{-1} = 1$, so we may always suppose that each relation is given in the form $w(a_1, \ldots, a_n) = 1$, and identify the relation with the word $w(a_1, \ldots, a_n)$.

Definition 2.1. A group presentation is a set $X$ together with a set $R$ of group theoretical words on the elements of $X$. The presentation $(X, R)$ is called finite if both $X$ and $R$ are finite.

Every group presentation $(X, R)$ does determine a group: take the free group $F$ on $X$ and the smallest normal subgroup $K$ of $F$ which contains $R$, and then the group determined by $(X, R)$ is the factor group $F/K$. We shall write $G = \langle X | R \rangle$ to indicate that $G$ is the group determined by the presentation $(X, R)$. (The group $G$ has of course many different presentations.) Henceforth, in order to avoid confusion between an element of $G$ and a particular construction of the element, a word $w$ shall mean an element of the free group $F$. The corresponding element of $G = F/K$ will be called the group element represented by $w$.

These problems have been solved for certain suitably restricted classes of presentations. (The reader is referred to [9], Section 6.1, for details.) In general, however, these problems are insoluble, and we shall try to show in this section how the theory of Turing machines can be used to establish the insolubility. In order that the underlying ideas will not be obscured by details, we shall restrict ourselves to a demonstration that there is a finitely-presented semigroup $S$ whose word problem is insoluble. The interested reader will find in Chapter 12 of [11] an account of the construction from $S$ of a finitely presented group $G$ with insoluble word problem. (This construction is purely algebraic, and makes no further use of the theory of Turing machines.)

Exercises

2.5. A presentation $(X, R)$ is called abelian if, for every $x, y \in X$, we have $x^{-1}y^{-1}xy \in R$. Show that the word problem for a finite abelian presentation is soluble. Show also that the isomorphism problem is soluble for pairs of finite abelian presentations.

2.6. Given that the finitely presented group $G = \langle X | R \rangle$ is finite, prove that it has soluble word problem and soluble conjugacy problem.

We now show how to associate a finite semigroup presentation with a Turing machine $M$. The idea behind the construction is to regard instantaneous descriptions as words, and to introduce relations which will make an instantaneous description represent the same semigroup element as does the instantaneous description obtained from the former one by one operation of the machine.

We shall always work with the shortest description, thereby avoiding difficulties arising from different descriptions of the same state of $M$. Thus an instantaneous description shall neither begin nor end with $s_0$. However, this introduces some difficulty into the construction of the set of relations, which we resolve by use of an end symbol $e$. With the description $\sigma q_i \tau$, we shall associate the semigroup word $e \sigma q_i \tau e$. It is also convenient to introduce a new internal state symbol $q_\infty$, meaning that the machine has stopped.

As we are dealing with semigroups and not groups, a relation necessarily involves

(b₀) for each quadruple $q_i s_0 L q_t \in M$, the relations

$$s_k q_i s_0 \sim q_t s_k s_0 \quad (\text{all } k),$$
$$eq_i s_0 \sim eq_t s_0 s_0,$$
$$s_k q_i e \sim q_t s_k e \quad (\text{all } k \neq 0),$$
$$s_0 q_i e \sim q_t e,$$
$$eq_i e \sim eq_t e,$$

(c) for each quadruple $q_i s_j R q_t \in M$ with $j \neq 0$, the relation

$$q_i s_j \sim s_j q_t,$$

(c₀) for each quadruple $q_i s_0 R q_t \in M$, the relations

$$s_k q_i s_0 \sim s_k s_0 q_t \quad (\text{all } k),$$
$$eq_i s_0 \sim eq_t,$$
$$s_k q_i e \sim s_k s_0 q_t e \quad (\text{all } k),$$
$$eq_i e \sim eq_t e,$$

(d) for each pair $q_i s_j$ for which there is no quadruple in $M$ beginning with $q_i s_j$, the relation

$$q_i s_j \sim q_\infty s_j,$$
and, if $j = 0$, the relation

$$q_i e \sim q_\infty e.$$

Let $w_1 = \sigma a\tau$ be a word and let $a \sim b$ be a relation in the above list. Substitution of $b$ for $a$ in $w_1$ gives the equivalent word $w_2 = \sigma b\tau$. Such a substitution, where the second member of a relation is substituted for the first, will be called a forward step. We write $w_1 \rightarrow w_2$ to denote that $w_2$ is obtainable from $w_1$ by a forward step. The reverse substitution is called a backward step, and we write $w_2 \leftarrow w_1$ to denote that $w_1$ is obtain

Lemma 2.8. Let $w, w'$ be special words. Suppose $w'$ is terminal. Then $w, w'$ are equivalent if and only if there is a path from $w$ to $w'$ consisting only of forward steps.

Proof. Trivially, if such a path exists, then $w \sim w'$. Suppose that $w \sim w'$. Then there exists a path

$$w = w_0 - w_1 - \cdots - w_n = w'$$

from $w$ to $w'$. We may suppose the path is chosen so that the number $n$ of steps is the least possible. (If $n = 0$, then the path consists only of forward steps.) If the path has any backward steps, then there is a last such, say $w_k \leftarrow w_{k+1}$. This cannot be the last step of the path, because there is no forward step away from a terminal word. Thus $k + 1 < n$ and $w_{k+1} \rightarrow w_{k+2}$ is a forward step. But there is at most one forward step away from any special word, since the machine operation is determined. This implies that $w_{k+2} = w_k$, and so

$$w = w_0 - w_1 - \cdots - w_k - w_{k+3} - \cdots - w_n = w'$$

is a shorter path from $w$ to $w'$, contrary to the original choice of path. Hence the shortest path consists only of forward steps. $\square$

We are now able to produce a Turing machine whose associated semigroup presentation has insoluble word problem.

Theorem 2.9. Let $E$ be a recursively enumerable but non-recursive subset of $\mathbb{N}$, and let $M$ be a Turing machine which, when started in the state $q_0 s_1^n$, stops with blank tape if $n \in E$, and does not stop if $n \notin E$. Then the semigroup presentation associated with $M$ has insoluble word problem.

Remark. The existence of such a set $E$ and Turing machine $M$ was established in Exercises 5.6 and 5

References and Further Reading

[1] Bell, J. L., Slomson, A. B.: Models and Ultraproducts: An Introduction. First revised edition. Amsterdam: North-Holland 1971.

[2] Davis, Martin: Hilbert’s Tenth Problem is Unsolvable. Amer. Math. Monthly 80, 233–269 (1973).

[3] Davis, Martin: Computability and Unsolvability. New York: McGraw-Hill 1958.

[4] Halmos, P. R.: Naive Set Theory. Princeton: Van Nostrand 1960. New York–Heidelberg–Berlin: Springer 1974.

[5] Hermite, Charles: Oeuvres, tII, pp. 5–12 Paris: Gauthier-Villars 1908.

[6] Kleene, S. C.: Introduction to Metamathematics. Princeton: Van Nostrand 1952.

[7] Lyndon, Roger C: Notes on Logic. Mathematical Studies, no. 6. New York: Van Nostrand 1964.

[8] Machover, M., Hirschfeld, J.: Lectures on Non-Standard Analysis. Lecture Notes in Mathematics 94. Berlin–Heidelberg–New York: Springer 1969.

[9] Magnus, W., Karrass, A., Solitar, D.: Combinatorial Group Theory: Presentations of Groups in Terms of Generators and Relations. New York–London–Sydney: Wiley-Interscience 1966.

[10] Mendelson, E.: Introduction to Mathematical Logic. New York: Van Nostrand 1964.

[11] Rotman, Joseph J.: The Theory of Groups: An Introduction. Boston- Allyn and Bacon 1965.

[12] Stoll, Robert R.: Set Theory and Logic. San Francisco-London: Freeman 1963.

[13] Yasuhara, Ann: Recursive Function Theory and Logic. New York: Academic Press 1971.

[14] Yates, Robert C.: The Trisection Problem. Rest

Index of Notations

The following notations are used at points remote from their explanations, which are given on the pages indicated.

$A \vDash p$ $p$ is a consequence of the assumptions $A$ 13
$A \vdash p$ $p$ is provable from the assumptions $A$ 15
$\text{al}(n)$ formula expressing “at least $n$ elements” 45
$\text{ar}(t)$ arity of $t$ 2
$\text{Con}(A)$ set of consequences of $A$ 13
$d(p)$ depth of quantification of $p$ 28
$D\rho$ domain of the relation $\rho$ 76
$\text{Ded}(A)$ set of all deductions from $A$ 15
$\text{dist}(x_1, \ldots, x_n)$ formula expressing “$x_1, \ldots, x_n$ are distinct” 48
$G(p)$ Gödel number of $p$ 91, 92
$\mathcal{I}$ identity relation symbol 38
$I$ (when unexplained) set of axioms of identity 38
$\mathcal{L}(\mathcal{T})$ language of the theory $\mathcal{T}$ 40
$\mathcal{N}$ recursive arithmetic 96
$\mathcal{N}_0$ recursive arithmetic without induction axiom scheme 97
$\mathcal{O}^k(S)$ set of $k$th order objects on $S$ 75
$\mathcal{P}$ Peano arithmetic 59
$P(\mathcal{T})$ algebra of the theory $\mathcal{T}$ 40
$P(X)$ free proposition algebra on $X$ 12
$\tilde{P}(V, \mathcal{R})$ full first-order algebra on $(V, \mathcal{R})$ 27
$P(V, \mathcal{R})$ reduced first-order algebra on $(V, \mathcal{R})$ 28
$\text{Pow}(M)$ power set of $M$ 54
$\text{Pred}(V, \mathcal{R})$ first-order predicate calculus on $(V, \mathcal{R})$ 30
$\text{Pred}_A(V

Subject Index

Addition, theory of 61
Adequacy 18
Adequacy Theorem 22, 36
Algebra, free 4
full first-order 27
Lindenbaum 22
proposition 12
reduced first-order 28
relatively free 8
universal 2
Algebraic theory 72
Alphabet of Turing machine 85
universal 90
Arity 1
Axiom of Choice 55, 57
of Extension 53, 56
of Infinity 54, 57
of Pairing 53, 57
of Power Set 54, 57
of Regularity 56
of Union 54, 57
Axiom Schema of Replacement 55, 57
of Restriction 55, 57
of Subsets 53, 56
Axioms of Pred($V, \mathcal{R}$) 30
of Prop($X$) 15
of a theory 40

Bounded universal quantifier 108

Cardinal of model 44
of theory 45
Categorical 44, 47
in cardinal $\chi$ 45, 47
Church’s Theorem 102
Church’s Thesis 105
Compactness Theorem 22, 37
Completeness 43, 44, 47, 51
Computation by Turing machine 88
Concurrent relation 76
Conjugacy Problem 110
Consequence 13, 30
proper 39
Consistency 18
of first-order theory 43
Consistency Theorem 19, 34
Consistent subset 40
maximal 40

Constant 40
Continuity 83
uniform 83

Decidability 19, 94
of Prop($X$) 24
of Theory of Equality 51
Deduction 15, 31
Deduction Theorem 1

Identical relation 7
Identity, axioms of 38
Predicate Calculus with 39
Incompleteness of recursive arithmetic 100
Infinite real numbers 81
Infinitesimal real numbers 81
Initial state 88
Internal relation 80
Interpretation 30
proper 39
Isomorphism of models 44
of $T$-algebras 4
Isomorphism Problem 110

Kalmar’s Theorem 103
$k$th-order objects 75

Language of theory 40
Law of an algebra 7
of a variety 7
Logic 18
Limit, direct 70
existence of 72
of function 83
of sequence 82
Löwenheim-Skolem Theorem 46

Minimalisation 106
Model of first-order theory 42
of Peano arithmetic 61
non-standard 75
standard 75
Modus ponens 15
Monad 82

Natural numbers in ZF 54
Non-standard model 75
Normal form, conjunctive 24
disjunctive 24
prenex 37

Operation 1, 2

$\mathcal{P}$ (Peano arithmetic) 59
completeness of 61
models of 61
Pair 53
Pairing function 106
Path 112

Peano axioms 58, 59
Predicate 26
Presentation 110, 111
Primary proposition 49
Primitive recursion 105
Projective geometry 40
Problem, Conjugacy 110
Decision 94
Hilbert’s Tenth 105
Isomorphism 110
Stopping 95
Word 110
Proof 15, 31
Proper consequence 39
interpretation 39

Quantifier, bounded universal 108
elimination 48
existential 26
reduction 48
universal 26

Recursive

State function 97
Step 112
Stopping Problem 95
Strongly definable 97
Substitution Theorem 17, 33
Subsystem of standard system 77
Subultraproduct 69
Successor 54
Syntactic implication 15, 31

$T$-algebra 2
$T$-subalgebra 3
Tautology 14, 30
Terminal state 88
word 112
Theorem 15, 31, 40, 100
Theory 40
Transitive set 55
Truth 13, 29
function 23
Turing machine 85
universal 92
Type 2

Ultrafilter 63
$\alpha$-complete 67

existence of 65
principal 63
restriction of 63
uniform 65

Ultrapowers 67
Ultraproducts 64
Undecidability of recursive arithmetic 100
of Predicate Calculus 101
Uniform convergence 84
Uniform ultrafilter 65

Universal algebra 1
alphabet 90
proposition 72
Turing machine 92

Valid 14, 30
Valuation 13
Variable 6
Variables involved in element of $\tilde{P}$ 27
of element of $P$ 29
Variety of $T$-algebras 7

Word 6
special 112
Word Problem 110<|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|><|endoftext|>

Graduate Texts in Mathematics

1. Takeuti/Zaring
   INTRODUCTION TO AXIOMATIC SET THEORY
   vii, 250 pages. 1971.

2. Oxtoby
   MEASURE AND CATEGORY
   viii, 95 pages. 1971.

3. Schaefer
   TOPOLOGICAL VECTOR SPACES
   xi, 294 pages. 1971.

4. Hilton/Stammbach
   A COURSE IN HOMOLOGICAL ALGEBRA
   ix, 338 pages. 1971.

5. MacLane
   CATEGORIES FOR THE WORKING MATHEMATICIAN
   ix, 262 pages. 1972.

6. Hughes/Piper
   PROJECTIVE PLANES
   xii, 291 pages. 1973.

7. Serre
   A CO